

BRAMBLE-BEES AND OTHERS

by J. HENRI FABRE




TRANSLATED BY ALEXANDER TEIXEIRA DE MATTOS, F.Z.S.

TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

In this volume I have collected all the essays on Wild Bees scattered
through the "Souvenirs entomologiques," with the exception of those
on the Chalicodomae, or Mason-bees proper, which form the contents of
a separate volume entitled "The Mason-bees."

The first two essays on the Halicti (Chapters 12 and 13) have already
appeared in an abbreviated form in "The Life and Love of the Insect,"
translated by myself and published by Messrs. A. & C. Black (in
America by the Macmillan Co.) in 1911. With the greatest courtesy and
kindness, Messrs. Black have given me their permission to include
these two chapters in the present volume; they did so without fee or
consideration of any kind, merely on my representation that it would
be a great pity if this uniform edition of Fabre's Works should be
rendered incomplete because certain essays formed part of volumes of
extracts previously published in this country. Their generosity is
almost unparalleled in my experience; and I wish to thank them
publicly for it in the name of the author, of the French publishers
and of the English and American publishers, as well as in my own.

Of the remaining chapters, one or two have appeared in the "English
Review" or other magazines; but most of them now see the light in
English for the first time.

I have once more, as in the case of "The Mason-bees," to thank Miss
Frances Rodwell for the help which she has given me in the work of
translation and research; and I am also grateful for much kind
assistance received from the staff of the Natural History Museum and
from Mr. Geoffrey Meade-Waldo in particular.

ALEXANDER TEIXEIRA DE MATTOS.

Chelsea, 1915.




CONTENTS.

TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.

CHAPTER 1. BRAMBLE-DWELLERS.

CHAPTER 2. THE OSMIAE.

CHAPTER 3. THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE SEXES.

CHAPTER 4. THE MOTHER DECIDES THE SEX OF THE EGG.

CHAPTER 5. PERMUTATIONS OF SEX.

CHAPTER 6. INSTINCT AND DISCERNMENT.

CHAPTER 7. ECONOMY OF ENERGY.

CHAPTER 8. THE LEAF-CUTTERS.

CHAPTER 9. THE COTTON-BEES.

CHAPTER 10. THE RESIN-BEES.

CHAPTER 11. THE POISON OF THE BEE.

CHAPTER 12. THE HALICTI: A PARASITE.

CHAPTER 13. THE HALICTI: THE PORTRESS.

CHAPTER 14. THE HALICTI: PARTHENOGENESIS.

INDEX.




CHAPTER 1. BRAMBLE-DWELLERS.

The peasant, as he trims his hedge, whose riotous tangle threatens to
encroach upon the road, cuts the trailing stems of the bramble a foot
or two from the ground and leaves the root-stock, which soon dries
up. These bramble-stumps, sheltered and protected by the thorny
brushwood, are in great demand among a host of Hymenoptera who have
families to settle. The stump, when dry, offers to any one that knows
how to use it a hygienic dwelling, where there is no fear of damp
from the sap; its soft and abundant pith lends itself to easy work;
and the top offers a weak spot which makes it possible for the insect
to reach the vein of least resistance at once, without cutting away
through the hard ligneous wall. To many, therefore, of the Bee and
Wasp tribe, whether honey-gatherers or hunters, one of these dry
stalks is a valuable discovery when its diameter matches the size of
its would-be inhabitants; and it is also an interesting subject of
study to the entomologist who, in the winter, pruning-shears in hand,
can gather in the hedgerows a faggot rich in small industrial
wonders. Visiting the bramble-bushes has long been one of my
favourite pastimes during the enforced leisure of the wintertime; and
it is seldom but some new discovery, some unexpected fact, makes up
to me for my torn fingers.

My list, which is still far from being complete, already numbers
nearly thirty species of bramble-dwellers in the neighbourhood of my
house; other observers, more assiduous than I, exploring another
region and one covering a wider range, have counted as many as fifty.
I give at foot an inventory of the species which I have noted.

(Bramble-dwelling insects in the neighbourhood of Serignan
(Vaucluse):

1. MELLIFEROUS HYMENOPTERA.
Osmia tridentata, DUF. and PER.
Osmia detrita, PEREZ.
Anthidium scapulare, LATR.
Heriades rubicola, PEREZ.
Prosopis confusa, SCHENCK.
Ceratina chalcites, GERM.
Ceratina albilabris, FAB.
Ceratina callosa, FAB.
Ceratina coerulea, VILLERS.

2. HUNTING HYMENOPTERA.
Solenius vagus, FAB. (provisions, Diptera).
Solenius lapidarius, LEP. (provisions, Spiders?).
Cemonus unicolor, PANZ. (provisions, Plant-lice).
Psen atratus (provisions, Black Plant-lice).
Tripoxylon figulus, LIN. (provisions, Spiders).
A Pompilus, unknown (provisions, Spiders).
Odynerus delphinalis, GIRAUD.

3. PARASITICAL HYMENOPTERA.
A Leucopsis, unknown (parasite of Anthidium scapulare).
A small Scoliid, unknown (parasite of Solenius vagus).
Omalus auratus (parasite of various bramble-dwellers).
Cryptus bimaculatus, GRAV. (parasite of Osmia detrita).
Cryptus gyrator, DUF. (parasite of Tripoxylon figulus).
Ephialtes divinator, ROSSI (parasite of Cemonus unicolor).
Ephialtes mediator, GRAV. (parasite of Psen atratus).
Foenus pyrenaicus, GUERIN.
Euritoma rubicola, J. GIRAUD (parasite of Osmia detrita).

4. COLEOPTERA.
Zonitis mutica, FAB. (parasite of Osmia tridentata).

Most of these insects have been submitted to a learned expert,
Professor Jean Perez, of Bordeaux. I take this opportunity of
renewing my thanks for his kindness in identifying them for me.--
Author's Note.)

They include members of very diverse corporations. Some, more
industrious and equipped with better tools, remove the pith from the
dry stem and thus obtain a vertical cylindrical gallery, the length
of which may be nearly a cubit. This sheath is next divided, by
partitions, into more or less numerous storeys, each of which forms
the cell of a larva. Others, less well-endowed with strength and
implements, avail themselves of the old galleries of other insects,
galleries that have been abandoned after serving as a home for their
builder's family. Their only work is to make some slight repairs in
the ruined tenement, to clear the channel of its lumber, such as the
remains of cocoons and the litter of shattered ceilings, and lastly
to build new partitions, either with a plaster made of clay or with a
concrete formed of pith-scrapings cemented with a drop of saliva.

You can tell these borrowed dwellings by the unequal size of the
storeys. When the worker has herself bored the channel, she
economizes her space: she knows how costly it is. The cells, in that
case, are all alike, the proper size for the tenant, neither too
large nor too small. In this box, which has cost weeks of labour, the
insect has to house the largest possible number of larvae, while
allotting the necessary amount of room to each. Method in the
superposition of the floors and economy of space are here the
absolute rule.

But there is evidence of waste when the insect makes use of a bramble
hollowed by another. This is the case with Tripoxylon figulus. To
obtain the store-rooms wherein to deposit her scanty stock of
Spiders, she divides her borrowed cylinder into very unequal cells,
by means of slender clay partitions. Some are a centimetre (.39
inch.--Translator's Note.) deep, the proper size for the insect;
others are as much as two inches. These spacious rooms, out of all
proportion to the occupier, reveal the reckless extravagance of a
casual proprietress whose title-deeds have cost her nothing.

But, whether they be the original builders or labourers touching up
the work of others, they all alike have their parasites, who
constitute the third class of bramble-dwellers. These have neither
galleries to excavate nor victuals to provide; they lay their egg in
a strange cell; and their grub feeds either on the provisions of the
lawful owner's larva or on that larva itself.

At the head of this population, as regards both the finish and the
magnitude of the structure, stands the Three-pronged Osmia (Osmia
tridentata, DUF. and PER.), to whom this chapter shall be specially
devoted. Her gallery, which has the diameter of a lead pencil,
sometimes descends to a depth of twenty inches. It is at first almost
exactly cylindrical; but, in the course of the victualling, changes
occur which modify it slightly at geometrically determined distances.
The work of boring possesses no great interest. In the month of July,
we see the insect, perched on a bramble-stump, attack the pith and
dig itself a well. When this is deep enough, the Osmia goes down,
tears off a few particles of pith and comes up again to fling her
load outside. This monotonous labour continues until the Bee deems
the gallery long enough, or until, as often happens, she finds
herself stopped by an impassable knot.

Next comes the ration of honey, the laying of the egg and the
partitioning, the last a delicate operation to which the insect
proceeds by degrees from the base to the top. At the bottom of the
gallery, a pile of honey is placed and an egg laid upon the pile;
then a partition is built to separate this cell from the next, for
each larva must have its special chamber, about a centimetre and a
half (.58 inch.--Translator's Note.) long, having no communication
with the chambers adjoining. The materials employed for this
partition are bramble-sawdust, glued into a paste with the insects'
saliva. Whence are these materials obtained? Does the Osmia go
outside, to gather on the ground the rubbish which she flung out when
boring the cylinder? On the contrary, she is frugal of her time and
has better things to do than to pick up the scattered particles from
the soil. The channel, as I said, is at first uniform in size, almost
cylindrical; its sides still retain a thin coating of pith, forming
the reserves which the Osmia, as a provident builder, has economized
wherewith to construct the partitions. So she scrapes away with her
mandibles, keeping within a certain radius, a radius that corresponds
with the dimensions of the cell which she is going to build next;
moreover, she conducts her work in such a way as to hollow out more
in the middle and leave the two ends contracted. In this manner, the
cylindrical channel of the start is succeeded, in the worked portion,
by an ovoid cavity flattened at both ends, a space resembling a
little barrel. This space will form the second cell.

As for the rubbish, it is utilized on the spot for the lid or cover
that serves as a ceiling for one cell and a floor for the next. Our
own master-builders could not contrive more successfully to make the
best use of their labourers' time. On the floor thus obtained, a
second ration of honey is placed; and an egg is laid on the surface
of the paste. Lastly, at the upper end of the little barrel, a
partition is built with the scrapings obtained in the course of the
final work on the third cell, which itself is shaped like a flattened
ovoid. And so the work goes on, cell upon cell, each supplying the
materials for the partition separating it from the one below. On
reaching the end of the cylinder, the Osmia closes up the case with a
thick layer of the same mortar. Then that bramble-stump is done with;
the Bee will not return to it. If her ovaries are not yet exhausted,
other dry stems will be exploited in the same fashion.

The number of cells varies greatly, according to the qualities of the
stalk. If the bramble-stump be long, regular and smooth, we may count
as many as fifteen: that, at least, is the highest figure which my
observations have supplied. To obtain a good idea of the internal
distribution, we must split the stalk lengthwise, in the winter, when
the provisions have long been consumed and when the larvae are
wrapped in their cocoons. We then see that, at regular intervals, the
case becomes slightly narrower; and in each of the necks thus formed
a circular disk is fixed, a partition one or two millimetres thick.
(.039 to .079 inch.--Translator's Note.) The rooms separated by these
partitions form so many little barrels or kegs, each compactly filled
with a reddish, transparent cocoon, through which the larva shows,
bent into a fish-hook. The whole suggests a string of rough, oval
amber beads, touching at their amputated ends.

In this string of cocoons, which is the oldest, which the youngest?
The oldest is obviously the bottom one, the one whose cell was the
first built; the youngest is the one at the top of the row, the one
in the cell last built. The oldest of the larvae starts the pile,
down at the bottom of the gallery; the latest arrival ends it at the
top; and those in between follow upon one another, according to age,
from base to apex.

Let us next observe that there is no room in the shaft for two Osmiae
at a time on the same level, for each cocoon fills up the storey, the
keg that belongs to it, without leaving any vacant space; let us also
remark that, when they attain the stage of perfection, the Osmiae
must all emerge from the shaft by the only orifice which the bramble-
stem boasts, the orifice at the top. There is here but one obstacle,
easy to overcome: a plug of glued pith, of which the insect's
mandibles make short work. Down below, the stalk offers no ready
outlet; besides, it is prolonged underground indefinitely by the
roots. Everywhere else is the ligneous fence, generally too hard and
thick to break through. It is inevitable therefore that all the
Osmiae, when the time comes to quit their dwelling, should go out by
the top; and, as the narrowness of the shaft bars the passage of the
preceding insect as long as the next insect, the one above it,
remains in position, the removal must begin at the top, extend from
cell to cell and end at the bottom. Consequently, the order of exit
is the converse to the order of birth: the younger Osmiae leave the
nest first, their elders leave it last.

The oldest, that is to say, the bottom one, was the first to finish
her supply of honey and to spin her cocoon. Taking precedence of all
her sisters in the whole series of her actions, she was the first to
burst her silken bag and to destroy the ceiling that closes her room:
at least, that is what the logic of the situation takes for granted.
In her anxiety to get out, how will she set about her release? The
way is blocked by the nearest cocoons, as yet intact. To clear
herself a passage through the string of those cocoons would mean to
exterminate the remainder of the brood; the deliverance of one would
mean the destruction of all the rest. Insects are notoriously
obstinate in their actions and unscrupulous in their methods. If the
Bee at the bottom of the shaft wants to leave her lodging, will she
spare those who bar her road?

The difficulty is great, obviously; it seems insuperable. Thereupon
we become suspicious: we begin to wonder if the emergence from the
cocoon, that is to say, the hatching, really takes place in the order
of primogeniture. Might it not be--by a very singular exception, it
is true, but one which is necessary in such circumstances--that the
youngest of the Osmiae bursts her cocoon first and the oldest last;
in short, that the hatching proceeds from one chamber to the next in
the inverse direction to that which the age of the occupants would
lead us to presume? In that case, the whole difficulty would be
removed: each Osmia, as she rent her silken prison, would find a
clear road in front of her, the Osmiae nearer the outlet having gone
out before her. But is this really how things happen? Our theories
very often do not agree with the insect's practice; even where our
reasoning seems most logical, we should be more prudent to see what
happens before venturing on any positive statements. Leon Dufour was
not so prudent when he, the first in the field, took this little
problem in hand. He describes to us the habits of an Odynerus
(Odynerus rubicola, DUF.) who piles up clay cells in the shaft of a
dry bramble-stalk; and, full of enthusiasm for his industrious Wasp,
he goes on to say:

'Picture a string of eight cement shells, placed end to end and
closely wedged inside a wooden sheath. The lowest was undeniably made
first and consequently contains the first-laid egg, which, according
to rules, should give birth to the first winged insect. How do you
imagine that the larva in that first shell was bidden to waive its
right of primogeniture and only to complete its metamorphosis after
all its juniors? What are the conditions brought into play to produce
a result apparently so contrary to the laws of nature? Humble
yourself in the presence of the reality and confess your ignorance,
rather than attempt to hide your embarrassment under vain
explanations!

'If the first egg laid by the busy mother were destined to be the
first-born of the Odyneri, that one, in order to see the light
immediately after achieving wings, would have had the option either
of breaking through the double walls of his prison or of perforating,
from bottom to top, the seven shells ahead of him, in order to emerge
through the truncate end of the bramble-stem. Now nature, while
refusing any way of escape laterally, was also bound to veto any
direct invasion, the brutal gimlet-work which would inevitably have
sacrificed seven members of one family for the safety of an only son.
Nature is as ingenious in design as she is fertile in resource, and
she must have foreseen and forestalled every difficulty. She decided
that the last-built cradle should yield the first-born child; that
this one should clear the road for his next oldest brother, the
second for the third and so on. And this is the order in which the
birth of our Odyneri of the Brambles actually takes place.'

Yes, my revered master, I will admit without hesitation that the
bramble-dwellers leave their sheath in the converse order to that of
their ages: the youngest first, the oldest last; if not invariably,
at least very often. But does the hatching, by which I mean the
emergence from the cocoon, take place in the same order? Does the
evolution of the elder wait upon that of the younger, so that each
may give those who would bar his passage time to effect their
deliverance and to leave the road clear? I very much fear that logic
has carried your deductions beyond the bounds of reality. Rationally
speaking, my dear sir, nothing could be more accurate than your
inferences; and yet we must forgo the theory of the strange inversion
which you suggest. None of the Bramble-bees with whom I have
experimented behaves after that fashion. I know nothing personal
about Odynerus rubicola, who appears to be a stranger in my district;
but, as the method of leaving must be almost the same when the
habitation is exactly similar, it is enough, I think, to experiment
with some of the bramble-dwellers in order to learn the history of
the rest.

My studies will, by preference, bear upon the Three-pronged Osmia,
who lends herself more readily to laboratory experiments, both
because she is stronger and because the same stalk will contain a
goodly number of her cells. The first fact to be ascertained is the
order of hatching. I take a glass tube, closed at one end, open at
the other and of a diameter similar to that of the Osmia's tunnel. In
this I place, one above the other, exactly in their natural order,
the ten cocoons, or thereabouts, which I extract from a stump of
bramble. The operation is performed in winter. The larvae, at that
time, have long been enveloped in their silken case. To separate the
cocoons from one another, I employ artificial partitions consisting
of little round disks of sorghum, or Indian millet, about half a
centimetre thick. (About one-fifth of an inch.--Translator's Note.)
This is a white pith, divested of its fibrous wrapper and easy for
the Osmia's mandibles to attack. My diaphragms are much thicker than
the natural partitions; this is an advantage, as we shall see. In any
case, I could not well use thinner ones, for these disks must be able
to withstand the pressure of the rammer which places them in position
in the tube. On the other hand, the experiment showed me that the
Osmia makes short work of the material when it is a case of drilling
a hole through it.

To keep out the light, which would disturb my insects destined to
spend their larval life in complete darkness, I cover the tube with a
thick paper sheath, easy to remove and replace when the time comes
for observation. Lastly, the tubes thus prepared and containing
either Osmiae or other bramble-dwellers are hung vertically, with the
opening at the top, in a snug corner of my study. Each of these
appliances fulfils the natural conditions pretty satisfactorily: the
cocoons from the same bramble-stick are stacked in the same order
which they occupied in the native shaft, the oldest at the bottom of
the tube and the youngest close to the orifice; they are isolated by
means of partitions; they are placed vertically, head upwards;
moreover, my device has the advantage of substituting for the opaque
wall of the bramble a transparent wall which will enable me to follow
the hatching day by day, at any moment which I think opportune.

The male Osmia splits his cocoon at the end of June and the female at
the beginning of July. When this time comes, we must redouble our
watch and inspect the tubes several times a day if we would obtain
exact statistics of the births. Well, during the six years that I
have studied this question, I have seen and seen again, ad nauseam;
and I am in a position to declare that there is no order governing
the sequence of hatchings, absolutely none. The first cocoon to burst
may be the one at the bottom of the tube, the one at the top, the one
in the middle or in any other part, indifferently. The second to be
split may adjoin the first or it may be removed from it by a number
of spaces, either above or below. Sometimes several hatchings occur
on the same day, within the same hour, some farther back in the row
of cells, some farther forward; and this without any apparent reason
for the simultaneity. In short, the hatchings follow upon one
another, I will not say haphazard--for each of them has its appointed
place in time, determined by impenetrable causes--but at any rate
contrary to our calculations, based on this or the other
consideration.

Had we not been deceived by our too shallow logic, we might have
foreseen this result. The eggs are laid in their respective cells at
intervals of a few days, of a few hours. How can this slight
difference in age affect the total evolution, which lasts a year?
Mathematical accuracy has nothing to do with the case. Each germ,
each grub has its individual energy, determined we know not how and
varying in each germ or grub. This excess of vitality belongs to the
egg before it leaves the ovary. Might it not, at the moment of
hatching, be the cause why this or that larva takes precedence of its
elders or its juniors, chronology being altogether a secondary
consideration? When the hen sits upon her eggs, is the oldest always
the first to hatch? In the same way, the oldest larva, lodged in the
bottom storey, need not necessarily reach the perfect state first.

A second argument, had we reflected more deeply on the matter, would
have shaken our faith in any strict mathematical sequence. The same
brood forming the string of cocoons in a bramble-stem contains both
males and females; and the two sexes are divided in the series
indiscriminately. Now it is the rule among the Bees for the males to
issue from the cocoon a little earlier than the females. In the case
of the Three-pronged Osmia, the male has about a week's start.
Consequently, in a populous gallery, there is always a certain number
of males, who are hatched seven or eight days before the females and
who are distributed here and there over the series. This would be
enough to make any regular hatching-sequence impossible in either
direction.

These surmises accord with the facts: the chronological sequence of
the cells tells us nothing about the chronological sequence of the
hatchings, which take place without any definite order. There is,
therefore, no surrender of rights of primogeniture, as Leon Dufour
thought: each insect, regardless of the others, bursts its cocoon
when its time comes; and this time is determined by causes which
escape our notice and which, no doubt, depend upon the potentialities
of the egg itself. It is the case with the other bramble-dwellers
which I have subjected to the same test (Osmia detrita, Anthidium
scapulare, Solenius vagus, etc.); and it must also be the case with
Odynerus rubicola: so the most striking analogies inform us.
Therefore the singular exception which made such an impression on
Dufour's mind is a sheer logical illusion.

An error removed is tantamount to a truth gained; and yet, if it were
to end here, the result of my experiment would possess but slight
value. After destruction, let us turn to construction; and perhaps we
shall find the wherewithal to compensate us for an illusion lost. Let
us begin by watching the exit.

The first Osmia to leave her cocoon, no matter what place she
occupies in the series, forthwith attacks the ceiling separating her
from the floor above. She cuts a fairly clean hole in it, shaped like
a truncate cone, having its larger base on the side where the Bee is
and its smaller base opposite. This conformation of the exit-door is
a characteristic of the work. When the insect tries to attack the
diaphragm, it first digs more or less at random; then, as the boring
progresses, the action is concentrated upon an area which narrows
until it presents no more than just the necessary passage. Nor is the
cone-shaped aperture special to the Osmia: I have seen it made by the
other bramble-dwellers through my thick disks of sorghum-pith. Under
natural conditions, the partitions, which, for that matter, are very
thin, are destroyed absolutely, for the contraction of the cell at
the top leaves barely the width which the insect needs. The truncate,
cone-shaped breach has often been of great use to me. Its wide base
made it possible for me, without being present at the work, to judge
which of the two neighbouring Osmiae had pierced the partition; it
told me the direction of a nocturnal migration which I had been
unable to witness.

The first-hatched Osmia, wherever she may be, has made a hole in her
ceiling. She is now in the presence of the next cocoon, with her head
at the opening of the hole. In front of her sister's cradle, she
usually stops, consumed with shyness; she draws back into her cell,
flounders among the shreds of the cocoon and the wreckage of the
ruined ceiling; she waits a day, two days, three days, more if
necessary. Should impatience gain the upper hand, she tries to slip
between the wall of the tunnel and the cocoon that blocks the way.
She even undertakes the laborious work of gnawing at the wall, so as
to widen the interval, if possible. We find these attempts, in the
shaft of a bramble, at places where the pith is removed down to the
very wood, where the wood itself is gnawed to some depth. I need
hardly say that, although these lateral inroads are perceptible after
the event, they escape the eye at the moment when they are being
made.

If we would witness them, we must slightly modify the glass
apparatus. I line the inside of the tube with a thick piece of whity-
brown packing-paper, but only over one half of the circumference; the
other half is left bare, so that I may watch the Osmia's attempts.
Well, the captive insect fiercely attacks this lining, which to its
eyes represents the pithy layer of its usual abode; it tears it away
by tiny particles and strives to cut itself a road between the cocoon
and the glass wall. The males, who are a little smaller, have a
better chance of success than the females. Flattening themselves,
making themselves thin, slightly spoiling the shape of the cocoon,
which, however, thanks to its elasticity, soon recovers its first
condition, they slip through the narrow passage and reach the next
cell. The females, when in a hurry to get out, do as much, if they
find the tube at all amenable to the process. But no sooner is the
first partition passed than a second presents itself. This is pierced
in its turn. In the same way will the third be pierced and others
after that, if the insect can manage them, as long as its strength
holds out. Too weak for these repeated borings, the males do not go
far through my thick plugs. If they contrive to cut through the
first, it is as much as they can do; and, even so, they are far from
always succeeding. But, in the conditions presented by the native
stalk, they have only feeble tissues to overcome; and then, slipping,
as I have said, between the cocoon and the wall, which is slightly
worn owing to the circumstances described, they are able to pass
through the remaining occupied chambers and to reach the outside
first, whatever their original place in the stack of cells. It is
just possible that their early eclosion forces this method of exit
upon them, a method which, though often attempted, does not always
succeed. The females, furnished with stronger tools, make greater
progress in my tubes. I see some who pierce three or four partitions,
one after the other, and are so many stages ahead before those whom
they have left behind are even hatched. While they are engaged in
this long and toilsome operation, others, nearer to the orifice, have
cleared a passage whereof those from a distance will avail
themselves. In this way, it may happen that, when the width of the
tube permits, an Osmia in a back row will nevertheless be one of the
first to emerge.

In the bramble-stem, which is of exactly the same diameter as the
cocoon, this escape by the side of the column appears hardly
practicable, except to a few males; and even these have to find a
wall which has so much pith that by removing it they can effect a
passage. Let us then imagine a tube so narrow as to prevent any exit
save in the natural sequence of the cells. What will happen? A very
simple thing. The newly-hatched Osmia, after perforating his
partition, finds himself faced with an unbroken cocoon that obstructs
the road. He makes a few attempts upon the sides and, realizing his
impotence, retires into his cell, where he waits for days and days,
until his neighbour bursts her cocoon in her turn. His patience is
inexhaustible. However, it is not put to an over long test, for
within a week, more or less, the whole string of females is hatched.

When two neighbouring Osmiae are released at the same time, mutual
visits are paid through the aperture between the two rooms: the one
above goes down to the floor below; the one below goes up to the
floor above; sometimes both of them are in the same cell together.
Might not this intercourse tend to cheer them and encourage them to
patience? Meanwhile, slowly, doors are opening here and there through
the separating walls; the road is cleared by sections; and a moment
arrives when the leader of the file walks out. The others follow, if
ready; but there are always laggards who keep the rear-ranks waiting
until they are gone.

To sum up, first, the hatching of the larvae takes place without any
order; secondly, the exodus proceeds regularly from summit to base,
but only in consequence of the insect's inability to move forward so
long as the upper cells are not vacated. We have here not an
exceptional evolution, in the inverse ratio to age, but the simple
impossibility of emerging otherwise. Should a chance occur of going
out before its turn, the insect does not fail to seize it, as we can
see by the lateral movements which send the impatient ones a few
ranks ahead and even release the more favoured altogether. The only
remarkable thing that I perceive is the scrupulous respect shown to
the as yet unopened neighbouring cocoon. However eager to come out,
the Osmia is most careful not to touch it with his mandibles: it is
taboo. He will demolish the partition, he will gnaw the side-wall
fiercely, even though there be nothing left but wood, he will reduce
everything around him to dust; but touch a cocoon that obstructs his
way? Never! He will not make himself an outlet by breaking up his
sisters' cradles.

It may happen that the Osmia's patience is in vain and that the
barricade that blocks the way never disappears at all. Sometimes, the
egg in a cell does not mature; and the unconsumed provisions dry up
and become a compact, sticky, mildewed plug, through which the
occupants of the floors below could never clear themselves a passage.
Sometimes, again, a grub dies in its cocoon; and the cradle of the
deceased, now turned into a coffin, forms an everlasting obstacle.
How shall the insect cope with such grave circumstances?

Among the many bramble-stumps which I have collected, some few have
presented a remarkable peculiarity. In addition to the orifice at the
top, they had at the side one and sometimes two round apertures that
looked as though they had been punched out with an instrument. On
opening these stalks, which were old, deserted nests, I discovered
the cause of these very exceptional windows. Above each of them was a
cell full of mouldy honey. The egg had perished and the provisions
remained untouched: hence the impossibility of getting out by the
ordinary road. Walled in by the unsurmountable obstacle, the Osmia on
the floor below had contrived an outlet through the side of the
shaft; and those in the lower storeys had benefited by this ingenious
innovation. The usual door being inaccessible, a side-window had been
opened by means of the insect's jaws. The cocoons, torn, but still in
position in the lower rooms, left no doubt as to this eccentric mode
of exit. The same fact, moreover, was repeated, in several bramble-
stumps, in the case of Osmia tridentata; it was likewise repeated in
the case of Anthidium scapulare. The observation was worth confirming
by experiment.

I select a bramble-stem with the thinnest rind possible, so as to
facilitate the Osmiae's work. I split it in half, thus obtaining a
smooth-sided trough which will enable me to judge better of future
exits. The cocoons are next laid out in one of the troughs. I
separate them with disks of sorghum, covering both surfaces of the
disk with a generous layer of sealing-wax, a material which the
Osmia's mandibles are not able to attack. The two troughs are then
placed together and fastened. A little putty does away with the joint
and prevents the least ray of light from penetrating. Lastly, the
apparatus is hung up perpendicularly, with the cocoons' heads up. We
have now only to wait. None of the Osmiae can get out in the usual
manner, because each of them is confined between two partitions
coated with sealing-wax. There is but one resource left to them if
they would emerge into the light of day, that is, for each of them to
open a side-window, provided always that they possess the instinct
and the power to do so.

In July, the result is as follows: of twenty Osmiae thus immured, six
succeed in boring a round hole through the wall and making their way
out; the others perish in their cells, without managing to release
themselves. But, when I open the cylinder, when I separate the two
wooden troughs, I realize that all have attempted to escape through
the side, for the wall of each cell bears traces of gnawing
concentrated upon one spot. All, therefore, have acted in the same
way as their more fortunate sisters; they did not succeed, because
their strength failed them. Lastly, in my glass tubes, part-lined
with a thick piece of packing-paper, I often see attempts at making a
window in the side of the cell: the paper is pierced right through
with a round hole.

This then is yet another result which I am glad to record in the
history of the bramble-dwellers. When the Osmia, the Anthidium and
probably others are unable to emerge through the customary outlet,
they take an heroic decision and perforate the side of the shaft. It
is the last resource, resolved upon after other methods have been
tried in vain. The brave, the strong succeed; the weak perish in the
attempt.

Supposing that all the Osmiae possessed the necessary strength of jaw
as well as the instinct for this sideward boring, it is clear that
egress from each cell through a special window would be much more
advantageous than egress through the common door. The Bee could
attend to his release as soon as he was hatched, instead of
postponing it until after the emancipation of those who come before
him; he would thus escape long waits, which too often prove fatal. In
point of fact, it is no uncommon thing to find bramble-stalks in
which several Osmiae have died in their cells, because the upper
storeys were not vacated in time. Yes, there would be a precious
advantage in that lateral opening, which would not leave each
occupant at the mercy of his environment: many die that would not
die. All the Osmiae, when compelled by circumstances, resort to this
supreme method; all have the instinct for lateral boring; but very
few are able to carry the work through. Only the favourites of fate
succeed, those more generously endowed with strength and
perseverance.

If the famous law of natural selection, which is said to govern and
transform the world, had any sure foundation; if really the fittest
removed the less fit from the scene; if the future were to the
strongest, to the most industrious, surely the race of Osmiae, which
has been perforating bramble-stumps for ages, should by this time
have allowed its weaker members, who go on obstinately using the
common outlet, to die out and should have replaced them, down to the
very last one, by the stalwart drillers of side-openings. There is an
opportunity here for immense progress; the insect is on the verge of
it and is unable to cross the narrow intervening line. Selection has
had ample time to make its choice; and yet, though there be a few
successes, the failures exceed them in very large measure. The race
of the strong has not abolished the race of the weak: it remains
inferior in numbers, as doubtless it has been since all time. The law
of natural selection impresses me with the vastness of its scope;
but, whenever I try to apply it to actual facts, it leaves me
whirling in space, with nothing to help me to interpret realities. It
is magnificent in theory, but it is a mere gas-bubble in the face of
existing conditions. It is majestic, but sterile. Then where is the
answer to the riddle of the world? Who knows? Who will ever know?

Let us waste no more time in this darkness, which idle theorizing
will not dispel; let us return to facts, humble facts, the only
ground that does not give way under our feet. The Osmia respects her
neighbour's cocoon; and her scruples are so great that, after vainly
trying to slip between that cocoon and the wall, or else to open a
lateral outlet, she lets herself die in her cell rather than effect
an egress by forcing her way through the occupied cells. When the
cocoon that blocks the way contains a dead instead of a live grub,
will the result be the same?

In my glass tubes, I let Osmia-cocoons containing a live grub
alternate with Osmia-cocoons in which the grub has been asphyxiated
by the fumes of sulphocarbonic acid. As usual, the storeys are
separated by disks of sorghum. The anchorites, when hatched, do not
hesitate long. Once the partition is pierced, they attack the dead
cocoons, go right through them, reducing the dead grub, now dry and
shrivelled, to dust, and at last emerge, after wrecking everything in
their path. The dead cocoons, therefore, are not spared; they are
treated as would be any other obstacle capable of attack by the
mandibles. The Osmia looks upon them as a mere barricade to be
ruthlessly overturned. How is she apprised that the cocoon, which has
undergone no outward change, contains a dead and not a live grub? It
is certainly not by sight. Can it be by sense of smell? I am always a
little suspicious of that sense of smell of which we do not know the
seat and which we introduce on the slightest provocation as a
convenient explanation of that which may transcend our explanatory
powers.

My next test is made with a string of live cocoons. Of course, I
cannot take all these from the same species, for then the experiment
would not differ from the one which we have already witnessed; I take
them from two different species which leave their bramble-stem at
separate periods. Moreover, these cocoons must have nearly the same
diameter to allow of their being stacked in a tube without leaving an
empty space between them and the wall. The two species adopted are
Solenius vagus, which quits the bramble at the end of June, and Osmia
detrita, which comes a little earlier, in the first fortnight of the
same month. I therefore alternate Osmia-cocoons and Solenius-cocoons,
with the latter at the top of the series, either in glass tubes or
between two bramble-troughs joined into a cylinder.

The result of this promiscuity is striking. The Osmiae, which mature
earlier, emerge; and the Solenius-cocoons, as well as their
inhabitants, which by this time have reached the perfect stage, are
reduced to shreds, to dust, wherein it is impossible for me to
recognize a vestige, save perhaps here and there a head, of the
exterminated unfortunates. The Osmia, therefore, has not respected
the live cocoons of a foreign species: she has passed out over the
bodies of the intervening Solenii. Did I say passed over their
bodies? She has passed through them, crunched the laggards between
her jaws, treated them as cavalierly as she treats my disks. And yet
those barricades were alive. No matter: when her hour came, the Osmia
went ahead, destroying everything upon her road. Here, at any rate,
is a law on which we can rely: the supreme indifference of the animal
to all that does not form part of itself and its race.

And what of the sense of smell, distinguishing the dead from the
living? Here, all are alive; and the Bee pierces her way as through a
row of corpses. If I am told that the smell of the Solenii may differ
from that of the Osmiae, I shall reply that such extreme subtlety in
the insect's olfactory apparatus seems to me a rather far-fetched
supposition. Then what is my explanation of the two facts? The
explanation? I have none to give! I am quite content to know that I
do not know, which at least spares me many vain lucubrations. And so
I do not know how the Osmia, in the dense darkness of her tunnel,
distinguishes between a live cocoon and a dead cocoon of the same
species; and I know just as little how she succeeds in recognizing a
strange cocoon. Ah, how clearly this confession of ignorance proves
that I am behind the times! I am deliberately missing a glorious
opportunity of stringing big words together and arriving at nothing.

The bramble-stump is perpendicular, or nearly so; its opening is at
the top. This is the rule under natural conditions. My artifices are
able to alter that state of things; I can place the tube vertically
or horizontally; I can turn its one orifice either up or down;
lastly, I can leave the channel open at both ends, which will give
two outlets. What will happen under these several conditions? That is
what we shall examine with the Three-pronged Osmia.

The tube is hung perpendicularly, but closed at the top and open at
the bottom; in fact, it represents a bramble-stump turned upside
down. To vary and complicate the experiment, the strings of cocoons
are arranged differently in different tubes. In some of them, the
heads of the cocoons are turned downwards, towards the opening; in
others, they are turned upwards, towards the closed end; in others
again, the cocoons alternate in direction, that is to say, they are
placed head to head and rear to rear, turn and turn about. I need not
say that the separating floors are of sorghum.

The result is identical in all these tubes. If the Osmiae have their
heads pointing upwards, they attack the partition above them, as
happens under normal conditions; if their heads point downwards, they
turn round in their cells and set to work as usual. In short, the
general outward trend is towards the top, in whatever position the
cocoon be placed.

We here see manifestly at work the influence of gravity, which warns
the insect of its reversed position and makes it turn round, even as
it would warn us if we ourselves happened to be hanging head
downwards. In natural conditions, the insect has but to follow the
counsels of gravity, which tells it to dig upwards, and it will
infallibly reach the exit-door situated at the upper end. But, in my
apparatus, these same counsels betray it: it goes towards the top,
where there is no outlet. Thus misled by my artifices, the Osmiae
perish, heaped up on the higher floors and buried in the ruins.

It nevertheless happens that attempts are made to clear a road
downwards. But it is rare for the work to lead to anything in this
direction, especially in the case of the middle or upper cells. The
insect is little inclined for this progress, the opposite to that to
which it is accustomed; besides, a serious difficulty arises in the
course of this reversed boring. As the Bee flings the excavated
materials behind her, these fall back of their own weight under her
mandibles; the clearance has to be begun anew. Exhausted by her
Sisyphean task, distrustful of this new and unfamiliar method, the
Osmia resigns herself and expires in her cell. I am bound to add,
however, that the Osmiae in the lower storeys, those nearest the
exit--sometimes one, sometimes two or three--do succeed in escaping.
In that case, they unhesitatingly attack the partitions below them,
while their companions, who form the great majority, persist and
perish in the upper cells.

It was easy to repeat the experiment without changing anything in the
natural conditions, except the direction of the cocoons: all that I
had to do was to hang up some bramble-stumps as I found them,
vertically, but with the opening downwards. Out of two stalks thus
arranged and peopled with Osmiae, not one of the insects succeeded in
emerging. All the Bees died in the shaft, some turned upwards, others
downwards. On the other hand, three stems occupied by Anthidia
discharged their population safe and sound. The outgoing was effected
at the bottom, from first to last, without the least impediment. Must
we take it that the two sorts of Bees are not equally sensitive to
the influences of gravity? Can the Anthidium, built to pass through
the difficult obstacle of her cotton wallets, be better-adapted than
the Osmia to make her way through the wreckage that keeps falling
under the worker's feet; or, rather, may not this very cotton-waste
put a stop to these cataracts of rubbish which must naturally drive
the insect back? This is all quite possible; but I can say nothing
for certain.

Let us now experiment with vertical tubes open at both ends. The
arrangements, save for the upper orifice, are the same as before. The
cocoons, in some of the tubes, have their heads turned down; others,
up; in others again, their positions alternate. The result is similar
to what we have seen above. A few Osmiae, those nearest the bottom
orifice, take the lower road, whatever the direction first occupied
by the cocoon; the others, composing by far the larger number, take
the higher road, even when the cocoon is placed upside down. As both
doors are free, the outgoing is effected at either end with success.

What are we to conclude from all these experiments? First, that
gravity guides the insect towards the top, where the natural door is,
and makes it turn in its cell when the cocoon has been reversed.
Secondly, I seem to suspect an atmospheric influence and, in any
case, some second cause that sends the insect to the outlet. Let us
admit that this cause is the proximity of the outer air acting upon
the anchorite through the partitions.

The animal then is subject, on the one hand, to the promptings of
gravity, and this to an equal degree for all, whatever the storey
inhabited. Gravity is the common guide of the whole series from base
to top. But those in the lower boxes have a second guide, when the
bottom end is open. This is the stimulus of the adjacent air, a more
powerful stimulus than that of gravity. The access of the air from
without is very slight, because of the partitions; while it can be
felt in the nethermost cells, it must decrease rapidly as the storeys
ascend. Wherefore the bottom insects, very few in number, obeying the
preponderant influence, that of the atmosphere, make for the lower
outlet and reverse, if necessary, their original position; those
above, on the contrary, who form the great majority, being guided
only by gravity when the upper end is closed, make for that upper
end. It goes without saying that, if the upper end be open at the
same time as the other, the occupants of the top storeys will have a
double incentive to take the ascending path, though this will not
prevent the dwellers on the lower floors from obeying, by preference,
the call of the adjacent air and adopting the downward road.

I have one means left whereby to judge of the value of my
explanation, namely, to experiment with tubes open at both ends and
lying horizontally. The horizontal position has a twofold advantage.
In the first place, it removes the insect from the influence of
gravity, inasmuch as it leaves it indifferent to the direction to be
taken, the right or the left. In the second place, it does away with
the descent of the rubbish which, falling under the worker's feet
when the boring is done from below, sooner or later discourages her
and makes her abandon her enterprise.

There are a few precautions to be observed for the successful conduct
of the experiment; I recommend them to any one who might care to make
the attempt. It is even advisable to remember them in the case of the
tests which I have already described. The males, those puny
creatures, not built for work, are sorry labourers when confronted
with my stout disks. Most of them perish miserably in their glass
cells, without succeeding in piercing their partitions right through.
Moreover, instinct has been less generous to them than to the
females. Their corpses, interspersed here and there in the series of
the cells, are disturbing causes, which it is wise to eliminate. I
therefore choose the larger, more powerful-looking cocoons. These,
except for an occasional unavoidable error, belong to females. I pack
them in tubes, sometimes varying their position in every way,
sometimes giving them all a like arrangement. It does not matter
whether the whole series comes from one and the same bramble-stump or
from several: we are free to choose where we please; the result will
not be altered.

The first time that I prepared one of these horizontal tubes open at
both ends, I was greatly struck by what happened. The series
consisted of ten cocoons. It was divided into two equal batches. The
five on the left went out on the left, the five on the right went out
on the right, reversing, when necessary, their original direction in
the cell. It was very remarkable from the point of view of symmetry;
moreover, it was a very unlikely arrangement among the total number
of possible arrangements, as mathematics will show us.

Let us take n to represent the number of Osmiae. Each of them, once
gravity ceases to interfere and leaves the insect indifferent to
either end of the tube, is capable of two positions, according as she
chooses the exit on the right or on the left. With each of the two
positions of this first Osmia can be combined each of the two
positions of the second, giving us, in all, 2 x 2 = (2 squared)
arrangements. Each of these (2 squared) arrangements can be combined,
in its turn, with each of the two positions of the third Osmia. We
thus obtain 2 x 2 x 2 = (2 cubed) arrangements with three Osmiae; and
so on, each additional insect multiplying the previous result by the
factor 2. With n Osmiae, therefore, the total number of arrangements
is (2 to the power n.)

But note that these arrangements are symmetrical, two by two: a given
arrangement towards the right corresponds with a similar arrangement
towards the left; and this symmetry implies equality, for, in the
problem in hand, it is a matter of indifference whether a fixed
arrangement correspond with the right or left of the tube. The
previous number, therefore, must be divided by 2. Thus, n Osmiae,
according as each of them turns her head to the right or left in my
horizontal tube, are able to adopt (2 to the power n - 1)
arrangements. If n = 10, as in my first experiment, the number of
arrangements becomes (2 to the power 9) = 512.

Consequently, out of 512 ways which my ten insects can adopt for
their outgoing position, there resulted one of those in which the
symmetry was most striking. And observe that this was not an effect
obtained by repeated attempts, by haphazard experiments. Each Osmia
in the left half had bored to the left, without touching the
partition on the right; each Osmia in the right half had bored to the
right, without touching the partition on the left. The shape of the
orifices and the surface condition of the partition showed this, if
proof were necessary. There had been a spontaneous decision, one half
in favour of the left, one half in favour of the right.

The arrangement presents another merit, one superior to that of
symmetry: it has the merit of corresponding with the minimum
expenditure of force. To admit of the exit of the whole series, if
the string consists of n cells, there are originally n partitions to
be perforated. There might even be one more, owing to a complication
which I disregard. There are, I say, at least n partitions to be
perforated. Whether each Osmia pierces her own, or whether the same
Osmia pierces several, thus relieving her neighbours, does not matter
to us: the sum-total of the force expended by the string of Bees will
be in proportion to the number of those partitions, in whatever
manner the exit be effected.

But there is another task which we must take seriously into
consideration, because it is often more troublesome than the boring
of the partition: I mean the work of clearing a road through the
wreckage. Let us suppose the partitions pierced and the several
chambers blocked by the resulting rubbish and by that rubbish only,
since the horizontal position precludes any mixing of the contents of
different chambers. To open a passage for itself through these
rubbish-heaps, each insect will have the smallest effort to make if
it passes through the smallest possible number of cells, in short, if
it makes for the opening nearest to it. These smallest individual
efforts amount, in the aggregate, to the smallest total effort.
Therefore, by proceeding as they did in my experiment, the Osmiae
effect their exit with the least expenditure of energy. It is curious
to see an insect apply the 'principle of least action,' so often
postulated in mechanics.

An arrangement which satisfies this principle, which conforms to the
law of symmetry and which possesses but one chance in 512, is
certainly no fortuitous result. It is determined by a cause; and, as
this cause acts invariably, the same arrangement must be reproduced
if I renew the experiment. I renewed it, therefore, in the years that
followed, with as many appliances as I could find bramble-stumps;
and, at each new test, I saw once more what I had seen with such
interest on the first occasion. If the number be even--and my column
at that time consisted usually of ten--one half goes out on the
right, the other on the left. If the number be odd--eleven, for
instance--the Osmia in the middle goes out indiscriminately by the
right or left exit. As the number of cells to be traversed is the
same on both sides, her expenditure of energy does not vary with the
direction of the exit; and the principle of least action is still
observed.

It was important to discover if the Three-pronged Osmia shared her
capacity, in the first place, with the other bramble-dwellers and, in
the second, with Bees differently housed, but also destined
laboriously to cut a new road for themselves when the hour comes to
quit the nest. Well, apart from a few irregularities, due either to
cocoons whose larva perished in my tubes before developing, or to
those inexperienced workers, the males, the result was the same in
the case of Anthidium scapulare. The insects divided themselves into
two equal batches, one going to the right, the other to the left.
Tripoxylon figulus left me undecided. This feeble insect is not
capable of perforating my partitions; it nibbles at them a little;
and I had to judge the direction from the marks of its mandibles.
These marks, which are not always very plain, do not yet allow me to
pronounce an opinion. Solenius vagus, who is a skilful borer, behaved
differently from the Osmia. In a column of ten, the whole exodus was
made in one direction.

On the other hand, I tested the Mason-bee of the Sheds, who, when
emerging under natural conditions, has only to pierce her cement
ceiling and is not confronted with a series of cells. Though a
stranger to the environment which I created for her, she gave me a
most positive answer. Of a column of ten laid in a horizontal tube
open at both ends, five made their way to the right and five to the
left. Dioxys cincta, a parasite in the buildings of both species of
Mason-bees, the Chalicodoma of the Sheds and the Chalicodoma of the
Walls (Cf. "The Mason-bees" by J. Henri Fabre, translated by
Alexander Teixeira de Mattos: passim.--Translator's Note.), provided
me with no precise result. The Leaf-cutting Bee (Megachile apicalis,
SPIN. (Cf. Chapter 8 of the present volume.--Translator's Note.)),
who builds her leafy cups in the old cells of the Chalicodoma of the
Walls, acts like the Solenius and directs her whole column towards
the same outlet.

Incomplete as it is, this symmetry shows us how unwise it were to
generalize from the conclusions to which the Three-pronged Osmia
leads us. Whereas some Bees, such as the Anthidium and the
Chalicodoma, share the Osmia's talent for using the twofold exit,
others, such as the Solenius and the Leaf-cutter, behave like a flock
of sheep and follow the first that goes out. The entomological world
is not all of a piece; its gifts are very various: what one is
capable of doing another cannot do; and penetrating indeed would be
the eyes that saw the causes of these differences. Be this as it may,
increased research will certainly show us a larger number of species
qualified to use the double outlet. For the moment, we know three;
and that is enough for our purpose.

I will add that, when the horizontal tube has one of its ends closed,
the whole string of Osmiae makes for the open end, turning round to
do so, if need be.

Now that the facts are set forth, let us, if possible, trace the
cause. In a horizontal tube, gravity no longer acts to determine the
direction which the insect will take. Is it to attack the partition
on the right or that on the left? How shall it decide? The more I
look into the matter, the more do my suspicions fall upon the
atmospheric influence which is felt through the two open ends. Of
what does this influence consist? Is it an effect of pressure, of
hygrometry, of electrical conditions, of properties that escape our
coarser physical attunement? He were a bold man who should undertake
to decide. Are not we ourselves, when the weather is about to alter,
subject to subtle impressions, to sensations which we are unable to
explain? And yet this vague sensitiveness to atmospheric changes
would not be of much help to us in circumstances similar to those of
my anchorites. Imagine ourselves in the darkness and the silence of a
prison-cell, preceded and followed by other similar cells. We possess
implements wherewith to pierce the walls; but where are we to strike
to reach the final outlet and to reach it with the least delay?
Atmospheric influence would certainly never guide us.

And yet it guides the insect. Feeble though it be, through the
multiplicity of partitions, it is exercised on one side more than on
the other, because the obstacles are fewer; and the insect, sensible
to the difference between those two uncertainties, unhesitatingly
attacks the partition which is nearer to the open air. Thus is
decided the division of the column into two converse sections, which
accomplish the total liberation with the least aggregate of work. In
short, the Osmia and her rivals 'feel' the free space. This is yet
one more sensory faculty which evolution might well have left us, for
our greater advantage. As it has not done so, are we then really, as
many contend, the highest expression of the progress accomplished,
throughout the ages, by the first atom of glair expanded into a cell?


CHAPTER 2. THE OSMIAE.

February has its sunny days, heralding spring, to which rude winter
will reluctantly yield place. In snug corners, among the rocks, the
great spurge of our district, the characias of the Greeks, the jusclo
of the Provencals, begins to lift its drooping inflorescence and
discreetly opens a few sombre flowers. Here the first Midges of the
year will come to slake their thirst. By the time that the tip of the
stalks reaches the perpendicular, the worst of the cold weather will
be over.

Another eager one, the almond-tree, risking the loss of its fruit,
hastens to echo these preludes to the festival of the sun, preludes
which are too often treacherous. A few days of soft skies and it
becomes a glorious dome of white flowers, each twinkling with a
roseate eye. The country, which still lacks green, seems dotted
everywhere with white-satin pavilions. 'Twould be a callous heart
indeed that could resist the magic of this awakening.

The insect nation is represented at these rites by a few of its more
zealous members. There is first of all the Honey-bee, the sworn enemy
of strikes, who profits by the least lull of winter to find out if
some rosemary is not beginning to open somewhere near the hive. The
droning of the busy swarm fills the flowery vault, while a snow of
petals falls softly to the foot of the tree.

Together with the population of harvesters there mingles another,
less numerous, of mere drinkers, whose nesting-time has not yet
begun. This is the colony of the Osmiae, with their copper-coloured
skin and bright-red fleece. Two species have come hurrying up to take
part in the joys of the almond-tree: first, the Horned Osmia, clad in
black velvet on the head and breast and in red velvet on the abdomen;
and, a little later, the Three-horned Osmia, whose livery must be red
and red only. These are the first delegates despatched by the pollen-
gleaners to ascertain the state of the season and attend the festival
of the early blooms. 'Tis but a moment since they burst their cocoon,
the winter abode: they have left their retreats in the crevices of
the old walls; should the north wind blow and set the almond-tree
shivering, they will hasten to return to them. Hail to you, O my dear
Osmiae, who yearly, from the far end of the harmas (The piece of
waste ground in which the author studied his insects in their natural
state. Cf. "The Life of the Fly" by J. Henri Fabre, translated by
Alexander Teixeira de Mattos: chapter 1.--Translator's Note.),
opposite snow-capped Ventoux (A mountain in the Provencal Alps, near
Carpentras and Serignan, 6,271 feet.--Translator's Note.), bring me
the first tidings of the awakening of the insect world! I am one of
your friends; let us talk about you a little.

Most of the Osmiae of my region have none of the industry of their
kinswomen of the brambles, that is to say, they do not themselves
prepare the dwelling destined for the laying. They want ready-made
lodgings, such as the old cells and old galleries of Anthophorae and
Chalicodomae. If these favourite haunts are lacking, then a hiding-
place in the wall, a round hole in some bit of wood, the tube of a
reed, the spiral of a dead Snail under a heap of stones are adopted,
according to the tastes of the several species. The retreat selected
is divided into chambers by partition-walls, after which the entrance
to the dwelling receives a massive seal. That is the sum-total of the
building done.

For this plasterer's rather than mason's work, the Horned and the
Three-horned Osmia employ soft earth. This material is different from
the Mason-bee's cement, which will withstand wind and weather for
many years on an exposed pebble; it is a sort of dried mud, which
turns to pap on the addition of a drop of water. The Mason-bee
gathers her cementing-dust in the most frequented and driest portions
of the road; she wets it with a saliva which, in drying, gives it the
consistency of stone. The two Osmiae who are the almond-tree's early
visitors are no chemists: they know nothing of the making and mixing
of hydraulic mortar; they limit themselves to gathering natural
soaked earth, mud in short, which they allow to dry without any
special preparation on their part; and so they need deep and well-
sheltered retreats, into which the rain cannot penetrate, or the work
would fall to pieces.

While exploiting, in friendly rivalry with the Three-horned Osmia,
the galleries which the Mason-bee of the Sheds good-naturedly
surrenders to both, Latreille's Osmia uses different materials for
her partitions and her doors. She chews the leaves of some
mucilaginous plant, some mallow perhaps, and then prepares a sort of
green putty with which she builds her partitions and finally closes
the entrance to the dwelling. When she settles in the spacious cells
of the Masked Anthophora (Anthophora personata, ILLIG.), the entrance
to the gallery, which is wide enough to admit one's finger, is closed
with a voluminous plug of this vegetable paste. On the earthy banks,
hardened by the sun, the home is then betrayed by the gaudy colour of
the lid. It is as though the authorities had closed the door and
affixed to it their great seals of green wax.

So far then as their building-materials are concerned, the Osmiae
whom I have been able to observe are divided into two classes: one
building compartments with mud, the other with a green-tinted
vegetable putty. The first section includes the Horned Osmia and the
Three-horned Osmia, both so remarkable for the horny tubercles on
their faces.

The great reed of the south, the Arundo donax, is often used, in the
country, for rough garden-shelters against the mistral or just for
fences. These reeds, the ends of which are chopped off to make them
all the same length, are planted perpendicularly in the earth. I have
often explored them in the hope of finding Osmia-nests. My search has
very seldom succeeded. The failure is easily explained. The
partitions and the closing-plug of the Horned and of the Three-horned
Osmia are made, as we have seen, of a sort of mud which water
instantly reduces to pap. With the upright position of the reeds, the
stopper of the opening would receive the rain and would become
diluted; the ceilings of the storeys would fall in and the family
would perish by drowning. Therefore the Osmia, who knew of these
drawbacks before I did, refuses the reeds when they are placed
perpendicularly.

The same reed is used for a second purpose. We make canisses of it,
that is to say, hurdles, which, in spring, serve for the rearing of
silk-worms and, in autumn, for the drying of figs. At the end of
April and during May, which is the time when the Osmiae work, the
canisses are indoors, in the silk-worm nurseries, where the Bee
cannot take possession of them; in autumn, they are outside, exposing
their layers of figs and peeled peaches to the sun; but by that time
the Osmiae have long disappeared. If, however, during the spring, an
old, disused hurdle is left out of doors, in a horizontal position,
the Three-horned Osmia often takes possession of it and makes use of
the two ends, where the reeds lie truncated and open.

There are other quarters that suit the Three-horned Osmia, who is not
particular, it seems to me, and will make shift with any hiding-
place, so long as it has the requisite conditions of diameter,
solidity, sanitation and kindly darkness. The most original dwellings
that I know her to occupy are disused Snail-shells, especially the
house of the Common Snail (Helix aspersa). Let us go to the slope of
the hills thick with olive-trees and inspect the little supporting-
walls which are built of dry stones and face the south. In the
crevices of this insecure masonry, we shall reap a harvest of old
Snail-shells, plugged with earth right up to the orifice. The family
of the Three-horned Osmia is settled in the spiral of those shells,
which is subdivided into chambers by mud partitions.

Let us inspect the stone-heaps, especially those which come from the
quarry-works. Here we often find the Field-mouse sitting on a grass
mattress, nibbling acorns, almonds, olive-stones and apricot-stones.
The Rodent varies his diet: to oily and farinaceous foods he adds the
Snail. When he is gone, he has left behind him, under the overhanging
stones, mixed up with the remains of other victuals, an assortment of
empty shells, sometimes plentiful enough to remind me of the heap of
Snails which, cooked with spinach and eaten country-fashion on
Christmas Eve, are flung away next day by the housewife. This gives
the Three-horned Osmia a handsome collection of tenements; and she
does not fail to profit by them. Then again, even if the Field-
mouse's conchological museum be lacking, the same broken stones serve
as a refuge for Garden-snails who come to live there and end by dying
there. When we see Three-horned Osmiae enter the crevices of old
walls and of stone-heaps, there is no doubt about their occupation:
they are getting free lodgings out of the old Snail-shells of those
labyrinths.

The Horned Osmia, who is less common, might easily also be less
ingenious, that is to say, less rich in varieties of houses. She
seems to scorn empty shells. The only homes that I know her to
inhabit are the reeds of the hurdles and the deserted cells of the
Masked Anthophora.

All the other Osmiae whose method of nest-building I know work with
green putty, a paste made of some crushed leaf or other; and none of
them, except Latreille's Osmia, is provided with the horned or
tubercled armour of the mud-kneaders. I should like to know what
plants are used in making the putty; probably each species has its
own preferences and its little professional secrets; but hitherto
observation has taught me nothing concerning these details. Whatever
worker prepare it, the putty is very much the same in appearance.
When fresh, it is always a clear dark green. Later, especially in the
parts exposed to the air, it changes, no doubt through fermentation,
to the colour of dead leaves, to brown, to dull-yellow; and the leafy
character of its origin is no longer apparent. But uniformity in the
materials employed must not lead us to believe in uniformity in the
lodging; on the contrary, this lodging varies greatly with the
different species, though there is a marked predilection in favour of
empty shells. Thus Latreille's Osmia, together with the Three-horned
Osmia, uses the spacious structures of the Mason-bee of the Sheds;
she likes the magnificent cells of the Masked Anthophora; and she is
always ready to establish herself in the cylinder of any reed lying
flat on the ground.

I have already spoken of an Osmia (O. cyanoxantha, PEREZ) who elects
to make her home in the old nests of the Mason-bee of the Pebbles.
(Cf. "The Mason-bees": chapter 10.--Translator's Note.) Her closing-
plug is made of a stout concrete, consisting of fair-sized bits of
gravel sunk in the green paste; but for the inner partitions she
employs only unalloyed putty. As the outer door, situated on the
curve of an unprotected dome, is exposed to the inclemencies of the
weather, the mother has to think of fortifying it. Danger, no doubt,
is the originator of that gritty concrete.

The Golden Osmia (O. aurulenta, LATR.) absolutely insists on an empty
Snail-shell as her residence. The Brown or Girdled Snail, the Garden
Snail and especially the Common Snail, who has a more spacious
spiral, all scattered at random in the grass, at the foot of the
walls and of the sun-swept rocks, furnish her with her usual
dwelling-house. Her dried putty is a kind of felt full of short white
hairs. It must come from some hairy-leaved plant, one of the
Boragineae perhaps, rich both in mucilage and the necessary bristles.

The Red Osmia (O. rufo-hirta, LATR.) has a weakness for the Brown
Snail and the Garden Snail, in whose shells I find her taking refuge
in April when the north-wind blows. I am not yet much acquainted with
her work, which should resemble that of the Golden Osmia.

The Green Osmia (O. viridana, MORAWITZ) takes up her quarters, tiny
creature that she is, in the spiral staircase of Bulimulus radiatus.
It is a very elegant, but very small lodging, to say nothing of the
fact that a considerable portion is taken up with the green-putty
plug. There is just room for two.

The Andrenoid Osmia (O. andrenoides, LATR.), who looks so curious,
with her naked red abdomen, appears to build her nest in the shell of
the Common Snail, where I discover her refuged.

The Variegated Osmia (O. versicolor, LATR.) settles in the Garden
Snail's shell, almost right at the bottom of the spiral.

The Blue Osmia (O. cyanea, KIRB.) seems to me to accept many
different quarters. I have extracted her from old nests of the Mason-
bee of the Pebbles, from the galleries dug in a roadside bank by the
Colletes (A short-tongued Burrowing-bee known also as the Melitta.--
Translator's Note.) and lastly from the cavities made by some digger
or other in the decayed trunk of a willow-tree.

Morawitz' Osmia (O. Morawitzi, PEREZ) is not uncommon in the old
nests of the Mason-bee of the Pebbles, but I suspect her of favouring
other lodgings besides.

The Three-pronged Osmia (O. tridentata, DUF. and PER.) creates a home
of her own, digging herself a channel with her mandibles in dry
bramble and sometimes in danewort. It mixes a few scrapings of
perforated pith with the green paste. Its habits are shared by the
Ragged Osmia (O. detrita, PEREZ) and by the Tiny Osmia (O. parvula,
DUF.)

The Chalicodoma works in broad daylight, on a tile, on a pebble, on a
branch in the hedge; none of her trade-practises is kept a secret
from the observer's curiosity. The Osmia loves mystery. She wants a
dark retreat, hidden from the eye. I would like, nevertheless, to
watch her in the privacy of her home and to witness her work with the
same facility as if she were nest-building in the open air. Perhaps
there are some interesting characteristics to be picked up in the
depths of her retreats. It remains to be seen whether my wish can be
realized.

When studying the insect's mental capacity, especially its very
retentive memory for places, I was led to ask myself whether it would
not be possible to make a suitably-chosen Bee build in any place that
I wished, even in my study. And I wanted, for an experiment of this
sort, not an individual but a numerous colony. My preference leant
towards the Three-horned Osmia, who is very plentiful in my
neighbourhood, where, together with Latreille's Osmia, she frequents
in particular the monstrous nests of the Chalicodoma of the Sheds. I
therefore thought out a scheme for making the Three-horned Osmia
accept my study as her settlement and build her nests in glass tubes,
through which I could easily watch the progress. To these crystal
galleries, which might well inspire a certain distrust, were to be
added more natural retreats: reeds of every length and thickness and
disused Chalicodoma-cells taken from among the biggest and the
smallest. A scheme like this sounds mad. I admit it, while mentioning
that perhaps none ever succeeded so well with me. We shall see as
much presently.

My method is extremely simple. All I ask is that the birth of my
insects, that is to say, their first seeing the light, their emerging
from the cocoon, should take place on the spot where I propose to
make them settle. Here there must be retreats of no matter what
nature, but of a shape similar to that in which the Osmia delights.
The first impressions of sight, which are the most long-lived of any,
shall bring back my insects to the place of their birth. And not only
will the Osmiae return, through the always open windows, but they
will always nidify on the natal spot if they find something like the
necessary conditions.

And so, all through the winter, I collect Osmia-cocoons, picked up in
the nests of the Mason-bee of the Sheds; I go to Carpentras to glean
a more plentiful supply in the nests of the Hairy-footed Anthophora,
that old acquaintance whose wonderful cities I used to undermine when
I was studying the history of the Oil-beetles. (This study is not yet
translated into English; but cf. "The Life of the Fly": chapters 2
and 4.--Translator's Note.) Later, at my request, a pupil and
intimate friend of mine, M. Henri Devillario, president of the civil
court at Carpentras, sends me a case of fragments broken off the
banks frequented by the Hairy-footed Anthophora and the Anthophora of
the Walls, useful clods which furnish a handsome adjunct to my
collection. Indeed, at the end, I find myself with handfuls of
cocoons of the Three-horned Osmia. To count them would weary my
patience without serving any particular purpose.

I spread out my stock in a large open box on a table which receives a
bright diffused light but not the direct rays of the sun. The table
stands between two windows facing south and overlooking the garden.
When the moment of hatching comes, those two windows will always
remain open to give the swarm entire liberty to go in and out as it
pleases. The glass tubes and the reed-stumps are laid here and there,
in fine disorder, close to the heap of cocoons and all in a
horizontal position, for the Osmia will have nothing to do with
upright reeds. The hatching of some of the Osmiae will therefore take
place under cover of the galleries destined to be the building-yard
later; and the site will be all the more deeply impressed on their
memory. When I have made these comprehensive arrangements, there is
nothing more to be done; and I wait patiently for the building-season
to open.

My Osmiae leave their cocoons in the second half of April. Under the
immediate rays of the sun, in well-sheltered nooks, the hatching
would occur a month earlier, as we can see from the mixed population
of the snowy almond-tree. The constant shade in my study has delayed
the awakening, without, however, making any change in the nesting-
period, which synchronizes with the flowering of the thyme. We now
have, around my working-table, my books, my jars and my various
appliances, a buzzing crowd that goes in and out of the windows at
every moment. I enjoin the household henceforth not to touch a thing
in the insects' laboratory, to do no more sweeping, no more dusting.
They might disturb the swarm and make it think that my hospitality
was not to be trusted. I suspect that the maid, wounded in her self-
esteem at seeing so much dust accumulating in the master's study, did
not always respect my prohibitions and came in stealthily, now and
again, to give a little sweep of the broom. At any rate, I came
across a number of Osmiae who seemed to have been crushed under foot
while taking a sunbath on the floor in front of the window. Perhaps
it was I myself who committed the misdeed in a heedless moment. There
is no great harm done, for the population is a numerous one; and,
notwithstanding those crushed by inadvertence, notwithstanding the
parasites wherewith many of the cocoons are infested, notwithstanding
those who may have come to grief outside or been unable to find their
way back, notwithstanding the deduction of one-half which we must
make for the males: notwithstanding all this, during four or five
weeks I witness the work of a number of Osmiae which is much too
large to allow of my watching their individual operations. I content
myself with a few, whom I mark with different-coloured spots to
distinguish them; and I take no notice of the others, whose finished
work will have my attention later.

The first to appear are the males. If the sun is bright, they flutter
around the heap of tubes as if to take careful note of the locality;
blows are exchanged and the rival swains indulge in mild skirmishing
on the floor, then shake the dust off their wings and fly away. I
find them, opposite my window, in the refreshment-bar of the lilac-
bush, whose branches bend with the weight of their scented panicles.
Here the Bees get drunk with sunshine and draughts of honey. Those
who have had their fill come home and fly assiduously from tube to
tube, placing their heads in the orifices to see if some female will
at last make up her mind to emerge.

One does, in point of fact. She is covered with dust and has the
disordered toilet that is inseparable from the hard work of the
deliverance. A lover has seen her, so has a second, likewise a third.
All crowd round her. The lady responds to their advances by clashing
her mandibles, which open and shut rapidly, several times in
succession. The suitors forthwith fall back; and they also, no doubt
to keep up their dignity, execute savage mandibular grimaces. Then
the beauty retires into the arbour and her wooers resume their places
on the threshold. A fresh appearance of the female, who repeats the
play with her jaws; a fresh retreat of the males, who do the best
they can to flourish their own pincers. The Osmiae have a strange way
of declaring their passion: with that fearsome gnashing of their
mandibles, the lovers look as though they meant to devour each other.
It suggests the thumps affected by our yokels in their moments of
gallantry.

The ingenious idyll is soon over. By turns greeting and greeted with
a clash of jaws, the female leaves her gallery and begins impassively
to polish her wings. The rivals rush forward, hoist themselves on top
of one another and form a pyramid of which each struggles to occupy
the base by toppling over the favoured lover. He, however, is careful
not to let go; he waits for the strife overhead to calm down; and,
when the supernumeraries realize that they are wasting their time and
throw up the game, the couple fly away far from the turbulent rivals.
This is all that I have been able to gather about the Osmia's
nuptials.

The females, who grow more numerous from day to day, inspect the
premises; they buzz outside the glass galleries and the reed
dwellings; they go in, stay for a while, come out, go in again and
then fly away briskly into the garden. They return, first one, then
another. They halt outside, in the sun, on the shutters fastened back
against the wall; they hover in the window-recess, come inside, go to
the reeds and give a glance at them, only to set off again and to
return soon after. Thus do they learn to know their home, thus do
they fix their birthplace in their memory. The village of our
childhood is always a cherished spot, never to be effaced from our
recollection. The Osmia's life endures for a month; and she acquires
a lasting remembrance of her hamlet in a couple of days. 'Twas there
that she was born; 'twas there that she loved; 'tis there that she
will return. Dulces reminiscitur Argos.
('Now falling by another's wound, his eyes
He casts to heaven, on Argos thinks and dies.'
--"Aeneid," Book 10 Dryden's translation.)

At last each has made her choice. The work of construction begins;
and my expectations are fulfilled far beyond my wishes. The Osmiae
build nests in all the retreats which I have placed at their
disposal. The glass tubes, which I cover with a sheet of paper to
produce the shade and mystery favourable to concentrated toil, do
wonderfully well. All, from first to last, are occupied. The Osmiae
quarrel for the possession of these crystal palaces, hitherto unknown
to their race. The reeds and the paper tubes likewise do wonderfully.
The number provided is too small; and I hasten to increase it. Snail-
shells are recognized as excellent abodes, though deprived of the
shelter of the stone-heap; old Chalicodoma-nests, down to those of
the Chalicodoma of the Shrubs (Cf. "The Mason-bees": chapters 4 and
10.--Translator's Note.), whose cells are so small, are eagerly
occupied. The late-comers, finding nothing else free, go and settle
in the locks of my table-drawers. There are daring ones who make
their way into half-open boxes containing ends of glass tubes in
which I have stored my most recent acquisitions: grubs, pupae and
cocoons of all kinds, whose evolution I wished to study. Whenever
these receptacles have an atom of free space, they claim the right to
build there, whereas I formally oppose the claim. I hardly reckoned
on such a success, which obliges me to put some order into the
invasion with which I am threatened. I seal up the locks, I shut my
boxes, I close my various receptacles for old nests, in short I
remove from the building-yard any retreat of which I do not approve.
And now, O my Osmiae, I leave you a free field!

The work begins with a thorough spring-cleaning of the home. Remnants
of cocoons, dirt consisting of spoilt honey, bits of plaster from
broken partitions, remains of dried Mollusc at the bottom of a shell:
these and much other insanitary refuse must first of all disappear.
Violently the Osmia tugs at the offending object and tears it out;
and then off she goes, in a desperate hurry, to dispose of it far
away from the study. They are all alike, these ardent sweepers: in
their excessive zeal, they fear lest they should block up the place
with a speck of dust which they might drop in front of the new house.
The glass tubes, which I myself have rinsed under the tap, are not
exempt from a scrupulous cleaning. The Osmia dusts them, brushes them
thoroughly with her tarsi and then sweeps them out backwards. What
does she pick up? Not a thing. It makes no difference: as a
conscientious housewife, she gives the place a touch of the broom
nevertheless.

Now for the provisions and the partition-walls. Here the order of the
work changes according to the diameter of the cylinder. My glass
tubes vary greatly in dimensions. The largest have an inner width of
a dozen millimetres (Nearly half an inch.--Translator's Note.); the
narrowest measure six or seven. (About a quarter of an inch.--
Translator's Note.) In the latter, if the bottom suit her, the Osmia
sets to work bringing pollen and honey. If the bottom do not suit
her, if the sorghum-pith plug with which I have closed the rear-end
of the tube be too irregular and badly-joined, the Bee coats it with
a little mortar. When this small repair is made, the harvesting
begins.

In the wider tubes, the work proceeds quite differently. At the
moment when the Osmia disgorges her honey and especially at the
moment when, with her hind-tarsi, she rubs the pollen-dust from her
ventral brush, she needs a narrow aperture, just big enough to allow
of her passage. I imagine that, in a straitened gallery, the rubbing
of her whole body against the sides gives the harvester a support for
her brushing-work. In a spacious cylinder, this support fails her;
and the Osmia starts with creating one for herself, which she does by
narrowing the channel. Whether it be to facilitate the storing of the
victuals or for any other reason, the fact remains that the Osmia
housed in a wide tube begins with the partitioning.

Her division is made by a dab of clay placed at right angles to the
axis of the cylinder, at a distance from the bottom determined by the
ordinary length of a cell. This wad is not a complete round; it is
more crescent-shaped, leaving a circular space between it and one
side of the tube. Fresh layers are swiftly added to the dab of clay;
and soon the tube is divided by a partition which has a circular
opening at the side of it, a sort of dog-hole through which the Osmia
will proceed to knead the Bee-bread. When the victualling is finished
and the egg laid upon the heap, the hole is closed and the filled-up
partition becomes the bottom of the next cell. Then the same method
is repeated, that is to say, in front of the just completed ceiling a
second partition is built, again with a side-passage, which is
stouter, owing to its distance from the centre, and better able to
withstand the numerous comings and goings of the housewife than a
central orifice, deprived of the direct support of the wall, could
hope to be. When this partition is ready, the provisioning of the
second cell is effected; and so on until the wide cylinder is
completely stocked.

The building of this preliminary party-wall, with a narrow, round
dog-hole, for a chamber to which the victuals will not be brought
until later is not restricted to the Three-horned Osmia; it is also
frequently found in the case of the Horned Osmia and of Latreille's
Osmia. Nothing could be prettier than the work of the last-named, who
goes to the plants for her material and fashions a delicate sheet in
which she cuts a graceful arch. The Chinaman partitions his house
with paper screens; Latreille's Osmia divides hers with disks of thin
green cardboard perforated with a serving-hatch which remains until
the room is completely furnished. When we have no glass houses at our
disposal, we can see these little architectural refinements in the
reeds of the hurdles, if we open them at the right season.

By splitting the bramble-stumps in the course of July, we perceive
also that the Three-pronged Osmia, notwithstanding her narrow
gallery, follows the same practice as Latreille's Osmia, with a
difference. She does not build a party-wall, which the diameter of
the cylinder would not permit; she confines herself to putting up a
frail circular pad of green putty, as though to limit, before any
attempt at harvesting, the space to be occupied by the Bee-bread,
whose depth could not be calculated afterwards if the insect did not
first mark out its confines. Can there really be an act of measuring?
That would be superlatively clever. Let us consult the Three-horned
Osmia in her glass tubes.

The Osmia is working at her big partition, with her body outside the
cell which she is preparing. From time to time, with a pellet of
mortar in her mandibles, she goes in and touches the previous ceiling
with her forehead, while the tip of her abdomen quivers and feels the
pad in course of construction. One might well say that she is using
the length of her body as a measure, in order to fix the next ceiling
at the proper distance. Then she resumes her work. Perhaps the
measure was not correctly taken; perhaps her memory, a few seconds
old, has already become muddled. The Bee once more ceases laying her
plaster and again goes and touches the front wall with her forehead
and the back wall with the tip of her abdomen. Looking at that body
trembling with eagerness, extended to its full length to touch the
two ends of the room, how can we fail to grasp the architect's grave
problem? The Osmia is measuring; and her measure is her body. Has she
quite done, this time? Oh dear no! Ten times, twenty times, at every
moment, for the least particle of mortar which she lays, she repeats
her mensuration, never being quite certain that her trowel is going
just where it should.

Meanwhile, amid these frequent interruptions, the work progresses and
the partition gains in width. The worker is bent into a hook, with
her mandibles on the inner surface of the wall and the tip of her
abdomen on the outer surface. The soft masonry stands between the two
points of purchase. The insect thus forms a sort of rolling-press, in
which the mud wall is flattened and shaped. The mandibles tap and
furnish mortar; the end of the abdomen also pats and gives brisk
trowel-touches. This anal extremity is a builder's tool; I see it
facing the mandibles on the other side of the partition, kneading and
smoothing it all over, flattening the little lump of clay. It is a
singular implement, which I should never have expected to see used
for this purpose. It takes an insect to conceive such an original
idea, to do mason's work with its behind! During this curious
performance, the only function of the legs is to keep the worker
steady by spreading out and clinging to the walls of the tunnel.

The partition with the hole in it is finished. Let us go back to the
measuring of which the Osmia was so lavish. What a magnificent
argument in favour of the reasoning-power of animals! To find
geometry, the surveyor's art, in an Osmia's tiny brain! An insect
that begins by taking the measurements of the room to be constructed,
just as any master-builder might do! Why, it's splendid, it's enough
to cover with confusion those horrible sceptics who persist in
refusing to admit the animal's 'continuous little flashes of atoms of
reason!'

O common-sense, veil your face! It is with this gibberish about
continuous flashes of atoms of reason that men pretend to build up
science to-day! Very well, my masters; the magnificent argument with
which I am supplying you lacks but one little detail, the merest
trifle: truth! Not that I have not seen and plainly seen all that I
am relating; but measuring has nothing to do with the case. And I can
prove it by facts.

If, in order to see the Osmia's nest as a whole, we split a reed
lengthwise, taking care not to disturb its contents; or, better
still, if we select for examination the string of cells built in a
glass tube, we are forthwith struck by one detail, namely, the uneven
distances between the partitions, which are placed almost at right
angles to the axis of the cylinder. It is these distances which fix
the size of the chambers, which, with a similar base, have different
heights and consequently unequal holding-capacities. The bottom
partitions, the oldest, are farther apart; those of the front part,
near the orifice, are closer together. Moreover, the provisions are
plentiful in the loftier cells, whereas they are niggardly and
reduced to one-half or even one-third in the cells of lesser height.

Here are a few examples of these inequalities. A glass tube with a
diameter of 12 millimetres (.468 inch.--Translator's Note.), inside
measurement, contains ten cells. The five lower ones, beginning with
the bottom-most, have as the respective distances between their
partitions, in millimetres:

11, 12, 16, 13, 11. (.429, .468, .624, .507, .429 inch.--Translator's
Note.)

The five upper ones measure between their partitions:

7, 7, 5, 6, 7. (.273, .273, .195, .234, .273 inch.--Translator's
Note.)

A reed-stump 11 millimetres (.429 inch.--Translator's Note.) across
the inside contains fifteen cells; and the respective distances
between the partitions of those cells, starting from the bottom, are:

13, 12, 12, 9, 9, 11, 8, 8, 7, 7, 7, 6, 6, 6, 7. (.507, .468, .468,
.351, .351, .429, .312, .312, .273, .273, .273, .234, .234, .234,
.273 inch.--Translator's Note.)

When the diameter of the tunnel is less, the partitions can be still
further apart, though they retain the general characteristic of being
closer to one another the nearer they are to the orifice. A reed of
five millimetres (.195 inch.--Translator's Note.) in diameter, gives
me the following distances, always starting from the bottom:

22, 22, 20, 20, 12, 14. (.858, .858, .78, .78, .468, .546 inch.--
Translator's Note.)

Another, of 9 millimetres (.351 inch.--Translator's Note.), gives me:

15, 14, 11, 10, 10, 9, 10. (.585, .546, .429, .39, .39, .351, .39
inch.--Translator's Note.)

A glass tube of 8 millimetres (.312 inch.--Translator's Note.)
yields:

15, 14, 20, 10, 10, 10. (.585, .546, .78, .39, .39, .39 inch.--
Translator's Note.).

I could fill pages and pages with such figures, if I cared to print
all my notes. Do they prove that the Osmia is a geometrician,
employing a strict measure based on the length of her body? Certainly
not, because many of those figures exceed the length of the insect;
because sometimes a higher number follows suddenly upon a lower;
because the same string contains a figure of one value and another
figure of but half that value. They prove only one thing: the marked
tendency of the insect to shorten the distance between the party-
walls as the work proceeds. We shall see later that the large cells
are destined for the females and the small ones for the males.

Is there not at least a measuring adapted to each sex? Again, not so;
for in the first series, where the females are housed, instead of the
interval of 11 millimetres, which occurs at the beginning and the
end, we find, in the middle of the series, an interval of 16
millimetres, while in the second series, reserved for the males,
instead of the interval of 7 millimetres at the beginning and the
end, we have an interval of 5 millimetres in the middle. It is the
same with the other series, each of which shows a striking
discrepancy in its figures. If the Osmia really studied the
dimensions of her chambers and measured them with the compasses of
her body, how could she, with her delicate mechanism, fail to notice
mistakes of 5 millimetres, almost half her own length?

Besides, all idea of geometry vanishes if we consider the work in a
tube of moderate width. Here, the Osmia does not fix the front
partition in advance; she does not even lay its foundation. Without
any boundary-pad, with no guiding mark for the capacity of the cell,
she busies herself straightway with the provisioning. When the heap
of Bee-bread is judged sufficient, that is, I imagine, when her tired
body tells her that she has done enough harvesting, she closes up the
chamber. In this case, there is no measuring; and yet the capacity of
the cell and the quantity of the victuals fulfil the regular
requirements of one or the other sex.

Then what does the Osmia do when she repeatedly stops to touch the
front partition with her forehead and the back partition, the one in
the course of building, with the tip of her abdomen? I have no idea
what she does or what she has in view. I leave the interpretation of
this performance to others, more venturesome than I. Plenty of
theories are based on equally shaky foundations. Blow on them and
they sink into the quagmire of oblivion.

The laying is finished, or perhaps the cylinder is full. A final
partition closes the last cell. A rampart is now built, at the
orifice of the tube itself, to forbid the ill-disposed all access to
the home. This is a thick plug, a massy work of fortification,
whereon the Osmia spends enough mortar to partition off any number of
cells. A whole day is not too long for making this barricade,
especially in view of the minute finishing-touches, when the Osmia
fills up with putty every chink through which the least atom could
slip. The mason completing a wall smooths his plaster and brings it
to a fine surface while it is still wet; the Osmia does the same, or
almost. With little taps of the mandibles and a continual shaking of
her head, a sign of her zest for the work, she smooths and polishes
the surface of the lid for hours at a time. After such pains, what
foe could visit the dwelling?

And yet there is one, an Anthrax, A. sinuata (Cf. "The Life of the
Fly": chapters 2 and 4.--Translator's Note.), who will come later on,
in the height of summer, and succeed, invisible bit of thread that
she is, in making her way to the grub through the thickness of the
door and the web of the cocoon. In many cells, mischief of another
kind has already been done. During the progress of the works, an
impudent Midge, one of the Tachina-flies, who feeds her family on the
victuals amassed by the Bee, hovers in front of the galleries. Does
she penetrate to the cells and lay her eggs there in the mother's
absence? I could never catch the sneak in the act. Does she, like
that other Tachina who ravages cells stocked with game (The cells of
the Hunting Wasps.--Translator's Note.), nimbly deposit her eggs on
the Osmia's harvest at the moment when the Bee is going indoors? It
is possible, though I cannot say for certain. The fact remains that
we soon see the Midge's grub-worms swarming around the larva, the
daughter of the house. There are ten, fifteen, twenty or more of them
gnawing with their pointed mouths at the common dish and turning the
food into a heap of fine, orange-coloured vermicelli. The Bee's grub
dies of starvation. It is life, life in all its ferocity even in
these tiny creatures. What an expenditure of ardent labour, of
delicate cares, of wise precautions, to arrive at...what? Her
offspring sucked and drained dry by the hateful Anthrax; her family
sweated and starved by the infernal Tachina.

The victuals consist mostly of yellow flour. In the centre of the
heap, a little honey is disgorged, which turns the pollen-dust into a
firm, reddish paste. On this paste the egg is laid, not flat, but
upright, with the fore-end free and the hind-end lightly held and
fixed in the plastic mass. When hatched, the young grub, kept in its
place by its rear-end, need only bend its neck a little to find the
honey-soaked paste under its mouth. When it grows stronger, it will
release itself from its support and eat up the surrounding flour.

All this is touching, in its maternal logic. For the new-born, dainty
bread-and-honey; for the adolescent, dry bread. In cases where the
provisions are all of a kind, these delicate precautions are
superfluous. The victuals of the Anthophorae and the Chalicodomae
consist of flowing honey, the same throughout. The egg is then laid
at full length on the surface, without any particular arrangement,
thus compelling the new-born grub to take its first mouthfuls at
random. This has no drawback, as the food is of the same quality
throughout. But, with the Osmia's provisions--dry powder on the
edges, jam in the centre--the grub would be in danger if its first
meal were not regulated in advance. To begin with pollen not seasoned
with honey would be fatal to its stomach. Having no choice of its
mouthfuls because of its immobility and being obliged to feed on the
spot where it was hatched, the young grub must needs be born on the
central mass, where it has only to bend its head a little way in
order to find what its delicate stomach calls for. The place of the
egg, therefore, fixed upright by its base in the middle of the red
jam, is most judiciously chosen. What a contrast between this
exquisite maternal forethought and the horrible destruction by the
Anthrax and the Midge!

The egg is rather large for the size of the Osmia. It is cylindrical,
slightly curved, rounded at both ends and transparent. It soon
becomes cloudy, while remaining diaphanous at each extremity. Fine
lines, hardly perceptible to the most penetrating lens, show
themselves in transverse circles. These are the first signs of
segmentation. A contraction appears in the front hyaline part,
marking the head. An extremely thin opaque thread runs down either
side. This is the cord of tracheae communicating between one
breathing-hole and another. At last, the segments show distinctly,
with their lateral pads. The grub is born.

At first, one would think that there was no hatching in the proper
sense of the word--that is to say, no bursting and casting of a
wrapper. The most minute attention is necessary to show that
appearances are deceptive and that actually a fine membrane is thrown
off from front to back. This infinitesimal shred is the shell of the
egg.

The grub is born. Fixed by its base, it curves into an arc and bends
its head, until now held erect, down to the red mass. The meal
begins. Soon a yellow cord occupying the front two-thirds of the body
proclaims that the digestive apparatus is swelling out with food. For
a fortnight, consume your provender in peace, my child; then spin
your cocoon: you are now safe from the Tachina! Shall you be safe
from the Anthrax' sucker later on? Alack!


CHAPTER 3. THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE SEXES.

Does the insect know beforehand the sex of the egg which it is about
to lay? When examining the stock of food in the cells just now, we
began to suspect that it does, for each little heap of provisions is
carefully proportioned to the needs at one time of a male and at
another of a female. What we have to do is to turn this suspicion
into a certainty demonstrated by experiment. And first let us find
out how the sexes are arranged.

It is not possible to ascertain the chronological order of a laying,
except by going to suitably-chosen species. Digging up the burrows of
Cerceris-, Bembex- or Philanthus-wasps will never tell us that this
grub has taken precedence of that in point of time nor enable us to
decide whether one cocoon in a colony belongs to the same family as
another. To compile a register of births is absolutely impossible
here. Fortunately there are a few species in which we do not find
this difficulty: these are the Bees who keep to one gallery and build
their cells in storeys. Among the number are the different
inhabitants of the bramble-stumps, notably the Three-pronged Osmiae,
who form an excellent subject for observation, partly because they
are of imposing-size--bigger than any other bramble-dwellers in my
neighbourhood--partly because they are so plentiful.

Let us briefly recall the Osmia's habits. Amid the tangle of a hedge,
a bramble-stalk is selected, still standing, but a mere withered
stump. In this the insect digs a more or less deep tunnel, an easy
piece of work owing to the abundance of soft pith. Provisions are
heaped up right at the bottom of the tunnel and an egg is laid on the
surface of the food: that is the first-born of the family. At a
height of some twelve millimetres (About half an inch.--Translator's
Note.), a partition is fixed, formed of bramble saw-dust and of a
green paste obtained by masticating particles of the leaves of some
plant that has not yet been identified. This gives a second storey,
which in its turn receives provisions and an egg, the second in order
of primogeniture. And so it goes on, storey by storey, until the
cylinder is full. Then a thick plug of the same green material of
which the partitions are formed closes the home and keeps out
marauders.

In this common cradle, the chronological order of births is perfectly
clear. The first-born of the family is at the bottom of the series;
the last-born is at the top, near the closed door. The others follow
from bottom to top in the same order in which they followed in point
of time. The laying is numbered automatically; each cocoon tells us
its respective age by the place which it occupies.

To know the sexes, we must wait for the month of June. But it would
be unwise to postpone our investigations until that period. Osmia-
nests are not so common that we can hope to pick one up each time
that we go out with that object; besides, if we wait for the
hatching-period before examining the brambles, it may happen that the
order has been disturbed through some insects' having tried to make
their escape as soon as possible after bursting their cocoons; it may
happen that the male Osmiae, who are more forward than the females,
are already gone. I therefore set to work a long time beforehand and
devote my leisure in winter to these investigations.

The bramble-sticks are split and the cocoons taken out one by one and
methodically transferred to glass tubes, of approximately the same
diameter as the native cylinder. These cocoons are arranged one on
top of the other in exactly the same order that they occupied in the
bramble; they are separated from one another by a cotton plug, an
insuperable obstacle to the future insect. There is thus no fear that
the contents of the cells may become mixed or transposed; and I am
saved the trouble of keeping a laborious watch. Each insect can hatch
at its own time, in my presence or not: I am sure of always finding
it in its place, in its proper order, held fast fore and aft by the
cotton barrier. A cork or sorghum-pith partition would not fulfil the
same purpose: the insect would perforate it and the register of
births would be muddled by changes of position. Any reader wishing to
undertake similar investigations will excuse these practical details,
which may facilitate his work.

We do not often come upon complete series, comprising the whole
laying, from the first-born to the youngest. As a rule, we find part
of a laying, in which the number of cocoons varies greatly, sometimes
falling as low as two, or even one. The mother has not deemed it
advisable to confide her whole family to a single bramble-stump; in
order to make the exit less toilsome, or else for reasons which
escape me, she has left the first home and elected to make a second
home, perhaps a third or more.

We also find series with breaks in them. Sometimes, in cells
distributed at random, the egg has not developed and the provisions
have remained untouched, but mildewed; sometimes, the larva has died
before spinning its cocoon, or after spinning it. Lastly, there are
parasites, such as the Unarmed Zonitis (Zonitis mutica, one of the
Oil-beetles.--Translator's Note.) and the Spotted Sapyga (A Digger-
wasp.--Translator's Note.), who interrupt the series by substituting
themselves for the original occupant. All these disturbing factors
make it necessary to examine a large number of nests of the Three-
pronged Osmia, if we would obtain a definite result.

I have been studying the bramble-dwellers for seven or eight years
and I could not say how many strings of cocoons have passed through
my hands. During a recent winter, in view particularly of the
distribution of the sexes, I collected some forty of this Osmia's
nests, transferred their contents into glass tubes and made a careful
summary of the sexes. I give some of my results. The figures start in
their order from the bottom of the tunnel dug in the bramble and
proceed upwards to the orifice. The figure 1 therefore denotes the
first-born of the series, the oldest in date; the highest figure
denotes the last-born. The letter M, placed under the corresponding
figure, represents the male and the letter F the female sex.

1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15
F  F  M  F  M  F  M  M  F  F  F  F  M  F  M

This is the longest series that I have ever been able to procure. It
is also complete, inasmuch as it comprises the entire laying of the
Osmia. My statement requires explaining, otherwise it would seem
impossible to know whether a mother whose acts one has not watched,
nay more, whom one has never seen, has or has not finished laying her
eggs. The bramble-stump under consideration leaves a free space of
nearly four inches above the continuous string of cocoons. Beyond it,
at the actual orifice, is the terminal stopper, the thick plug which
closes the entrance to the gallery. In this empty portion of the
tunnel there is ample accommodation for numerous cocoons. The fact
that the mother has not made use of it proves that her ovaries were
exhausted; for it is exceedingly unlikely that she has abandoned
first-rate lodgings to go laboriously digging a new gallery elsewhere
and there continue her laying.

You may say that, if the unoccupied space marks the end of the
laying, nothing tells us that the beginning is actually at the bottom
of the cul-de-sac, at the other end of the tunnel. You may also say
that the laying is done in shifts, separated by intervals of rest.
The space left empty in the channel would mean that one of these
shifts was finished and not that there were no more eggs ripe for
hatching. In answer to these very plausible explanations, I will say
that, the sum of my observations--and they have been extremely
numerous--is that the total number of eggs laid not only by the
Osmiae but by a host of other Bees fluctuates round about fifteen.

Besides, when we consider that the active life of these insects lasts
hardly a month; when we remember that this period of activity is
disturbed by dark, rainy or very windy days, during which all work is
suspended; when lastly we ascertain, as I have done ad nauseam in the
case of the Three-horned Osmia, the time required for building and
victualling a cell, it becomes obvious that the total laying must be
kept within narrow bounds and that the mother has no time to lose if
she wishes to get fifteen cells satisfactorily built in three or four
weeks interrupted by compulsory rests. I shall give some facts later
which will dispel your doubts, if any remain.

I assume, therefore, that a number of eggs bordering on fifteen
represents the entire family of an Osmia, as it does of many other
Bees.

Let us consult some other complete series. Here are two:

1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13
F  F  M  F  M  F  M  F  F  F  F  M  F
F  M  F  F  F  M  F  F  M  F  M

In both cases, the laying is taken as complete, for the same reasons
as above.

We will end with some series that appear to me incomplete, in view of
the small number of cells and the absence of any free space above the
pile of cocoons:

1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8
M  M  F  M  M  M  M  M
M  M  F  M  F  M  M  M
F  M  F  F  M  M
M  M  M  F  M
F  F  F  F
M  M     M
F  M

These examples are more than sufficient. It is quite evident that the
distribution of the sexes is not governed by any rule. All that I can
say on consulting the whole of my notes, which contain a good many
instances of complete layings--most of them, unfortunately, spoilt
through gaps caused by parasites, the death of the larva, the failure
of the egg to hatch and other accidents--all that I can say in
general is that the complete series begins with females and nearly
always ends with males. The incomplete series can teach us nothing in
this respect, for they are only fragments starting we know not
whence; and it is impossible to tell whether they should be ascribed
to the beginning, to the end, or to an intermediate period of the
laying. To sum up: in the laying of the Three-pronged Osmia, no order
governs the succession of the sexes; only, the series has a marked
tendency to begin with females and to finish with males.

The brambles, in my district, harbour two other Osmiae, both of much
smaller size: O. detrita, PEREZ, and O. parvula, DUF. The first is
very common, the second very rare; and until now I have found only
one of her nests, placed above a nest of O. detrita, in the same
bramble. Here, instead of the lack of order in the distribution of
the sexes which we find with O. tridentata, we have an order
remarkable for consistency and simplicity. I have before me the list
of the series of O. detrita collected last winter. Here are some of
them:

1. A series of twelve: seven females, beginning with the bottom of
the tunnel, and then five males.

2. A series of nine: three females first, then six males.

3. A series of eight: five females followed by three males.

4. A series of eight: seven females followed by one male.

5. A series of eight: one female followed by seven males.

6. A series of seven: six females followed by one male.

The first series might very well be complete. The second and fifth
appear to be the end of layings, of which the beginning has taken
place elsewhere, in another bramble-stump. The males predominate and
finish off the series. Nos. 3, 4 and 6, on the other hand, look like
the beginnings of layings: the females predominate and are at the
head of the series. Even if these interpretations should be open to
doubt, one result at least is certain: with O. detrita, the laying is
divided into two groups, with no intermingling of the sexes; the
first group laid yields nothing but females, the second, or more
recent, yields nothing but males.

What was only a sort of attempt with the Three-pronged Osmia--who, it
is true, begins with females and ends with males, but muddles up the
order and mixes the two sexes anyhow between the extreme points--
becomes a regular law with her kinswoman. The mother occupies herself
at the start with the stronger sex, the more necessary, the better-
gifted, the female sex, to which she devotes the first flush of her
laying and the fullness of her vigour; later, when she is perhaps
already at the end of her strength, she bestows what remains of her
maternal solicitude upon the weaker sex, the less-gifted, almost
negligible male sex.

O. parvula, of whom I unfortunately possess but one series, repeats
what the previous witness has just shown us. This series, one of nine
cocoons, comprises five females followed by four males, without any
mixing of the sexes.

Next to these disgorgers of honey and gleaners of pollen-dust, it
would be well to consult other Hymenoptera, Wasps who devote
themselves to the chase and pile their cells one after the other, in
a row, showing the relative age of the cocoons. The brambles house
several of these: Solenius vagus, who stores up Flies; Psen atratus,
who provides her grubs with a heap of Plant-lice; Trypoxylon figulus,
who feeds them with Spiders.

Solenius vagus digs her gallery in a bramble-stick that is lopped
short, but still fresh and green. The house of this Fly-huntress,
therefore, suffers from damp, as the sap enters, especially on the
lower floors. This seems to me rather insanitary. To avoid the
humidity, or for other reasons which escape me, the Solenius does not
dig very far into her bramble-stump and consequently can stack but a
small number of cells in it. A series of five cocoons gives me first
four females and then one male; another series, also of five,
contains first three females, with two males following. These are the
most complete that I have for the moment.

I reckoned on the Black Psen, or Psen atratus, whose series are
pretty long; it is a pity that they are nearly always greatly
interfered with by a parasite called Ephialtes mediator. (Cf. "The
Life of the Fly": chapter 2.--Translator's Note.) I obtained only
three series free from gaps: one of eight cocoons, comprising only
females; one of six, likewise consisting wholly of females; lastly,
one of eight, formed exclusively of males. These instances seem to
show that the Psen arranges her laying in a succession of females and
a succession of males; but they tell us nothing of the relative order
of the two series.

>From the Spider-huntress, Trypoxylon figulus, I learnt nothing
decisive. She appeared to me to rove about from one bramble to the
next, utilizing galleries which she has not dug herself. Not
troubling to be economical with a lodging which it has cost her
nothing to acquire, she carelessly builds a few partitions at very
unequal heights, stuffs three or four compartments with Spiders and
passes on to another bramble-stump, with no reason, so far as I know,
for abandoning the first. Her cells, therefore, occur in series that
are too short to give us any useful information.

This is all that the bramble-dwellers have to tell us; I have
enumerated the list of the principal ones in my district. We will now
look into some other Bees who arrange their cocoons in single files:
the Megachiles (Cf. Chapter 8 of the present volume.--Translator's
Note.), who cut disks out of leaves and fashion the disks into
thimble-shaped receptacles; the Anthidia (Cf. Chapters 9 and 10 of
the present volume.--Translator's Note.), who weave their honey-
wallets out of cotton-wool and arrange their cells one after the
other in some cylindrical gallery. In most cases, the home is the
produce of neither the one nor the other. A tunnel in the upright,
earthy banks, the old work of some Anthophora, is the usual dwelling.
There is no great depth to these retreats; and all my searches,
zealously prosecuted during a number of winters, procured me only
series containing a small number of cocoons, four or five at most,
often one alone. And, what is quite as serious, nearly all these
series are spoilt by parasites and allow me to draw no well-founded
deductions.

I remembered finding, at rare intervals, nests of both the Anthidium
and the Megachile in the hollows of cut reeds. I thereupon installed
some hives of a new kind on the sunniest walls of my enclosure. They
consisted of stumps of the great reed of the south, open at one end,
closed at the other by the natural knot and gathered into a sort of
enormous pan-pipe, such as Polyphemus might have employed. The
invitation was accepted: Osmiae, Anthidia and Megachiles came in
fairly large numbers, especially the first, to benefit by the queer
installation.

In this way I obtained some magnificent series of Anthidia and
Megachiles, running up to a dozen. There was a melancholy side to
this success. All my series, with not one exception, were ravaged by
parasites. Those of the Megachile (M. sericans, FONSCOL), who
fashions her goblets with robinia-, holm-, and terebinth-leaves, were
inhabited by Coelioxys octodentata (A Parasitic Bee.--Translator's
Note.); those of the Anthidium (A. florentinum, LATR.) were occupied
by a Leucopsis. Both kinds were swarming with a colony of pigmy
parasites whose name I have not yet been able to discover. In short,
my pan-pipe hives, though very useful to me from other points of
view, taught me nothing about the order of the sexes among the Leaf-
cutters and the cotton-weavers.

I was more fortunate with three Osmiae (O. tricornis, LATR., O.
cornuta, LATR., and O. Latreillii, SPIN.), all of whom gave me
splendid results, with reed-stumps arranged either against the walls
of my garden, as I have just said, or near their customary abode, the
huge nests of the Mason-bee of the Sheds. One of them, the Three-
horned Osmia, did better still: as I have described, she built her
nests in my study, as plentifully as I could wish, using reeds, glass
tubes and other retreats of my selecting for her galleries.

We will consult this last, who has furnished me with documents beyond
my fondest hopes, and begin by asking her of how many eggs her
average laying consists. Of the whole heap of colonized tubes in my
study, or else out of doors, in the hurdle-reeds and the pan-pipe
appliances, the best-filled contains fifteen cells, with a free space
above the series, a space showing that the laying is ended, for, if
the mother had any more eggs available, she would have lodged them in
the room which she leaves unoccupied. This string of fifteen appears
to be rare; it was the only one that I found. My attempts at indoor
rearing, pursued during two years with glass tubes or reeds, taught
me that the Three-horned Osmia is not much addicted to long series.
As though to decrease the difficulties of the coming deliverance, she
prefers short galleries, in which only a part of the laying is
stacked. We must then follow the same mother in her migration from
one dwelling to the next if we would obtain a complete census of her
family. A spot of colour, dropped on the Bee's thorax with a paint-
brush while she is absorbed in closing up the mouth of the tunnel,
enables us to recognize the Osmia in her various homes.

In this way, the swarm that resided in my study furnished me, in the
first year, with an average of twelve cells. Next year, the summer
appeared to be more favourable and the average became rather higher,
reaching fifteen. The most numerous laying performed under my eyes,
not in a tube, but in a succession of Snail-shells, reached the
figure of twenty-six. On the other hand, layings of between eight and
ten are not uncommon. Lastly, taking all my records together, the
result is that the family of the Osmia fluctuates round about fifteen
in number.

I have already spoken of the great differences in size apparent in
the cells of one and the same series. The partitions, at first widely
spaced, draw gradually nearer to one another as they come closer to
the aperture, which implies roomy cells at the back and narrow cells
in front. The contents of these compartments are no less uneven
between one portion and another of the string. Without any exception
known to me, the large cells, those with which the series starts,
have more abundant provisions than the straitened cells with which
the series ends. The heap of honey and pollen in the first is twice
or even thrice as large as that in the second. In the last cells, the
most recent in date, the victuals are but a pinch of pollen, so
niggardly in amount that we wonder what will become of the larva with
that meagre ration.

One would think that the Osmia, when nearing the end of the laying,
attaches no importance to her last-born, to whom she doles out space
and food so sparingly. The first-born receive the benefit of her
early enthusiasm: theirs is the well-spread table, theirs the
spacious apartments. The work has begun to pall by the time that the
last eggs are laid; and the last-comers have to put up with a scurvy
portion of food and a tiny corner.

The difference shows itself in another way after the cocoons are
spun. The large cells, those at the back, receive the bulky cocoons;
the small ones, those in front, have cocoons only a half or a third
as big. Before opening them and ascertaining the sex of the Osmia
inside, let us wait for the transformation into the perfect insect,
which will take place towards the end of summer. If impatience gets
the better of us, we can open them at the end of July or in August.
The insect is then in the nymphal stage; and it is easy, under this
form, to distinguish the two sexes by the length of the antennae,
which are larger in the males, and by the glassy protuberances on the
forehead, the sign of the future armour of the females. Well, the
small cocoons, those in the narrow front cells, with their scanty
store of provisions, all belong to males; the big cocoons, those in
the spacious and well-stocked cells at the back, all belong to
females.

The conclusion is definite: the laying of the Three-horned Osmia
consists of two distinct groups, first a group of females and then a
group of males.

With my pan-pipe apparatus displayed on the walls of my enclosure and
with old hurdle-reeds left lying flat out of doors, I obtained the
Horned Osmia in fair quantities. I persuaded Latreille's Osmia to
build her nest in reeds, which she did with a zeal which I was far
from expecting. All that I had to do was to lay some reed-stumps
horizontally within her reach, in the immediate neighbourhood of her
usual haunts, namely, the nests of the Mason-bee of the Sheds.
Lastly, I succeeded without difficulty in making her build her nests
in the privacy of my study, with glass tubes for a house. The result
surpassed my hopes.

With both these Osmiae, the division of the gallery is the same as
with the Three-horned Osmia. At the back are large cells with
plentiful provisions and widely-spaced partitions; in front, small
cells, with scanty provisions and partitions close together. Also,
the larger cells supplied me with big cocoons and females; the
smaller cells gave me little cocoons and males. The conclusion
therefore is exactly the same in the case of all three Osmiae.

Before dismissing the Osmiae, let us devote a moment to their
cocoons, a comparison of which, in the matter of bulk, will furnish
us with fairly accurate evidence as to the relative size of the two
sexes, for the thing contained, the perfect insect, is evidently
proportionate to the silken wrapper in which it is enclosed. These
cocoons are oval-shaped and may be regarded as ellipsoids formed by a
revolution around the major axis. The volume of one of these solids
is expressed in the following formula:

4 / 3 x pi x a x (b squared),

in which 2a is the major axis and 2b the minor axis.

Now, the average dimensions of the cocoons of the Three-horned Osmia
are as follows:

2a = 13 mm. (.507 inch.--Translator's Note.), 2b = 7 mm. (.273 inch.-
-Translator's Note.) in the females;

2a = 9 mm. (.351 inch.--Translator's Note.), 2b = 5 mm. (.195 inch.--
Translator's Note.) in the males.

The ratio therefore between 13 x 7 x 7 = 637 and 9 x 5 x 5 = 225 will
be more or less the ratio between the sizes of the two sexes. This
ratio is somewhere between 2 to 1 and 3 to 1. The females therefore
are two or three times larger than the males, a proportion already
suggested by a comparison of the mass of provisions, estimated simply
by the eye.

The Horned Osmia gives us the following average dimensions:

2a = 15 mm. (.585 inch.--Translator's Note.), 2b = 9 mm. (.351 inch.-
-Translator's Note.) in the females;

2a = 12 mm. (.468 inch.--Translator's Note.), 2b = 7 mm. (.273 inch.-
-Translator's Note.) in the males.

Once again, the ratio between 15 x 9 x 9 = 1215 and 12 x 7 x 7 = 588
lies between 2 to 1 and 3 to 1.

Besides the Bees who arrange their laying in a row, I have consulted
others whose cells are grouped in a way that makes it possible to
ascertain the relative order of the two sexes, though not quite so
precisely. One of these is the Mason-bee of the Walls. I need not
describe again her dome-shaped nest, built on a pebble, which is now
so well-known to us. (Cf. "The Mason-bees": chapter 1.--Translator's
Note.)

Each mother chooses her stone and works on it in solitude. She is an
ungracious landowner and guards her site jealously, driving away any
Mason who even looks as though she might alight on it. The
inhabitants of the same nest are therefore always brothers and
sisters; they are the family of one mother.

Moreover, if the stone presents a large enough surface--a condition
easily fulfilled--the Mason-bee has no reason to leave the support on
which she began her laying and go in search of another whereon to
deposit the rest of her eggs. She is too thrifty of her time and of
her mortar to involve herself in such expenditure except for grave
reasons. Consequently, each nest, at least when it is new, when the
Bee herself has laid the first foundations, contains the entire
laying. It is a different thing when an old nest is restored and made
into a place for depositing the eggs. I shall come back later to such
houses.

A newly-built nest then, with rare exceptions, contains the entire
laying of one female. Count the cells and we shall have the total
list of the family. Their maximum number fluctuates round about
fifteen. The most luxuriant series will occasionally reach as many as
eighteen, though these are very scarce.

When the surface of the stone is regular all around the site of the
first cell, when the mason can add to her building with the same
facility in every direction, it is obvious that the groups of cells,
when finished, will have the oldest in the central portion and the
more recent in the surrounding portion. Because of this juxtaposition
of the cells, which serve partly as a wall to those which come next,
it is possible to form some estimate of the chronological order of
the cells in the Chalicodoma's nest and thus to discover the sequence
of the two sexes.

In winter, by which time the Bee has long been in the perfect state,
I collect Chalicodoma-nests, removing them bodily from their support
with a few smart sideward taps of the hammer on the pebbles. At the
base of the mortar dome the cells are wide agape and display their
contents. I take the cocoon from its box, open it and take note of
the sex of the insect enclosed.

I should probably be accused of exaggeration if I mentioned the total
number of the nests which I have gathered and the cells which I have
inspected by this method during the last six or seven years. I will
content myself with saying that the harvest of a single morning
sometimes consisted of as many as sixty nests of the Mason-bee. I had
to have help in carrying home my spoils, even though the nests were
removed from their stones on the spot.

>From the enormous number of nests which I have examined, I am able to
state that, when the cluster is regular, the female cells occupy the
centre and the male cells the edges. Where the irregularity of the
pebble has prevented an even distribution around the initial point,
the same rule has been observed. A male cell is never surrounded on
every side by female cells: either it occupies the edges of the nest,
or else it adjoins, at least on some sides, other male cells, of
which the last form part of the exterior of the cluster. As the
surrounding cells are obviously of a later date than the inner cells,
it follows that the Mason-bee acts like the Osmiae: she begins her
laying with females and ends it with males, each of the sexes forming
a series of its own, independent of the other.

Some further circumstances add their testimony to that of the
surrounded and surrounding cells. When the pebble projects sharply
and forms a sort of dihedral angle, one of whose faces is more or
less vertical and the other horizontal, this angle is a favourite
site with the Mason, who thus finds greater stability for her edifice
in the support given her by the double plane. These sites appear to
me to be in great request with the Chalicodoma, considering the
number of nests which I find thus doubly supported. In nests of this
kind, all the cells, as usual, have their foundations fixed to the
horizontal surface; but the first row, the row of cells first built,
stands with its back against the vertical surface.

Well, these older cells, which occupy the actual edge of the dihedral
angle, are always female, with the exception of those at either end
of the row, which, as they belong to the outside, may be male cells.
In front of this first row come others. The female cells occupy the
middle portion and the male the ends. Finally, the last row, closing
in the remainder, contains only male cells. The progress of the work
is very visible here: the Mason has begun by attending to the central
group of female cells, the first row of which occupies the dihedral
angle, and has finished her task by distributing the male cells round
the outside.

If the perpendicular face of the dihedral angle be high enough, it
sometimes happens that a second row of cells is placed above the
first row backing on to that plane; a third row occurs less often.
The nest is then one of several storeys. The lower storeys, the
older, contain only females; the upper, the more recent storey,
contains none but males. It goes without saying that the surface
layer, even of the lower storeys, can contain males without
invalidating the rule, for this layer may always be looked upon as
the Chalicodoma's last work.

Everything therefore contributes to show that, in the Mason-bee, the
females take the lead in the order of primogeniture. Theirs is the
central and best-protected part of the clay fortress; the outer part,
that most exposed to the inclemencies of the weather and to
accidents, is for the males.

The males' cells do not differ from the females' only by being placed
at the outside of the cluster; they differ also in their capacity,
which is much smaller. To estimate the respective capacities of the
two sorts of cells, I go to work as follows: I fill the empty cell
with very fine sand and pour this sand back into a glass tube
measuring 5 millimetres (.195 inch.--Translator's Note.) in diameter.
>From the height of the column of sand we can estimate the comparative
capacity of the two kinds of cells. I will take one at random among
my numerous examples of cells thus gauged.

It comprises thirteen cells and occupies a dihedral angle. The female
cells give me the following figures, in millimetres, as the height of
the columns of sand:

40, 44, 43, 48, 48, 46, 47
(1.56, 1.71, 1.67, 1.87, 1.87, 1.79, 1.83 inches.--Translator's
Note.),

averaging 45. (1.75 inches.--Translator's Note.)

The male cells give me:

32, 35, 28, 30, 30, 31
(1.24, 1.36, 1.09, 1.17, 1.17, 1.21 inches.--Translator's Note.),

averaging 31. (1.21 inches.--Translator's Note.)

The ratio of the capacity of the cells for the two sexes is therefore
roughly a ratio of 4 to 3. The actual contents of the cell being
proportionate to its capacity, the above ratio must also be more or
less the ratio of provisions and sizes between females and males.
These figures will assist us presently to tell whether an old cell,
occupied for a second or third time, belonged originally to a female
or a male.

The Chalicodoma of the Sheds cannot give us any information on this
matter. She builds under the same eaves, in excessively populous
colonies; and it is impossible to follow the labours of any single
Mason, whose cells, distributed here and there, are soon covered up
with the work of her neighbours. All is muddle and confusion in the
individual output of the swarming throng.

I have not watched the work of the Chalicodoma of the Shrubs with
close enough attention to be able to state definitely that this Bee
is a solitary builder. Her nest is a ball of clay hanging from a
bough. Sometimes, this nest is the size of a large walnut and then
appears to be the work of one alone; sometimes, it is the size of a
man's fist, in which case I have no doubt that it is the work of
several. Those bulky nests, comprising more than fifty cells, can
tell us nothing exact, as a number of workers must certainly have
collaborated to produce them.

The walnut-sized nests are more trustworthy, for everything seems to
indicate that they were built by a single Bee. Here females are found
in the centre of the group and males at the circumference, in
somewhat smaller cells, thus repeating what the Mason-bee of the
Pebbles has told us.

One clear and simple rule stands out from this collection of facts.
Apart from the strange exception of the Three-pronged Osmia, who
mixes the sexes without any order, the Bees whom I studied and
probably a crowd of others produce first a continuous series of
females and then a continuous series of males, the latter with less
provisions and smaller cells. This distribution of the sexes agrees
with what we have long known of the Hive-bee, who begins her laying
with a long sequence of workers, or sterile females, and ends it with
a long sequence of males. The analogy continues down to the capacity
of the cells and the quantities of provisions. The real females, the
Queen-bees, have wax cells incomparably more spacious than the cells
of the males and receive a much larger amount of food. Everything
therefore demonstrates that we are here in the presence of a general
rule.

But does this rule express the whole truth? Is there nothing beyond a
laying in two series? Are the Osmiae, the Chalicodomae and the rest
of them fatally bound by this distribution of the sexes into two
distinct groups, the male group following upon the female group,
without any mixing of the two? Is the mother absolutely powerless to
make a change in this arrangement, should circumstances require it?

The Three-pronged Osmia already shows us that the problem is far from
being solved. In the same bramble-stump, the two sexes occur very
irregularly, as though at random. Why this mixture in the series of
cocoons of a Bee closely related to the Horned Osmia and the Three-
horned Osmia, who stack theirs methodically by separate sexes in the
hollow of a reed? What the Bee of the brambles does cannot her
kinswomen of the reeds do too? Nothing, so far as I know, can explain
this difference in a physiological act of primary importance. The
three Bees belong to the same genus; they resemble one another in
general outline, internal structure and habits; and, with this close
similarity, we suddenly find a strange dissimilarity.

There is just one thing that might possibly arouse a suspicion of the
cause of this irregularity in the Three-pronged Osmia's laying. If I
open a bramble-stump in the winter to examine the Osmia's nest, I
find it impossible, in the vast majority of cases, to distinguish
positively between a female and a male cocoon: the difference in size
is so small. The cells, moreover, have the same capacity: the
diameter of the cylinder is the same throughout and the partitions
are almost always the same distance apart. If I open it in July, the
victualling-period, it is impossible for me to distinguish between
the provisions destined for the males and those destined for the
females. The measurement of the column of honey gives practically the
same depth in all the cells. We find an equal quantity of space and
food for both sexes.

This result makes us foresee what a direct examination of the two
sexes in the adult form tells us. The male does not differ materially
from the female in respect of size. If he is a trifle smaller, it is
scarcely noticeable, whereas, in the Horned Osmia and the Three-
horned Osmia, the male is only half or a third the size of the
female, as we have seen from the respective bulk of their cocoons. In
the Mason-bee of the Walls there is also a difference in size, though
less pronounced.

The Three-pronged Osmia has not therefore to trouble about adjusting
the dimensions of the dwelling and the quantity of the food to the
sex of the egg which she is about to lay; the measure is the same
from one end of the series to the other. It does not matter if the
sexes alternate without order: one and all will find what they need,
whatever their position in the row. The two other Osmiae, with their
great disparity in size between the two sexes, have to be careful
about the twofold consideration of board and lodging. And that, I
think, is why they begin with spacious cells and generous rations for
the homes of the females and end with narrow, scantily-provisioned
cells, the homes of the males. With this sequence, sharply defined
for the two sexes, there is less fear of mistakes which might give to
one what belongs to another. If this is not the explanation of the
facts, I see no other.

The more I thought about this curious question, the more probable it
appeared to me that the irregular series of the Three-pronged Osmia
and the regular series of the other Osmiae, of the Chalicodomae and
of the Bees in general were all traceable to a common law. It seemed
to me that the arrangement in a succession first of females and then
of males did not account for everything. There must be something
more. And I was right: that arrangement in series is only a tiny
fraction of the reality, which is remarkable in a very different way.
This is what I am going to prove by experiment.


CHAPTER 4. THE MOTHER DECIDES THE SEX OF THE EGG.

I will begin with the Mason-bee of the Pebbles. (This is the same
insect as the Mason-bee of the Walls. Cf. "The Mason-bees": passim.--
Translator's Note.) The old nests are often used, when they are in
good enough repair. Early in the season the mothers quarrel fiercely
over them; and, when one of the Bees has taken possession of the
coveted dome, she drives any stranger away from it. The old house is
far from being a ruin, only it is perforated with as many holes as it
once had occupants. The work of restoration is no great matter. The
heap of earth due to the destruction of the lid by the outgoing
tenant is taken out of the cell and flung away at a distance, atom by
atom. The remnants of the cocoon are also thrown away, but not
always, for the delicate silken wrapper sometimes adheres closely to
the masonry.

The victualling of the renovated cell is now begun. Next comes the
laying; and lastly the orifice is sealed with a mortar plug. A second
cell is utilized in the same way, followed by a third and so on, one
after the other, as long as any remain unoccupied and the mother's
ovaries are not exhausted. Finally, the dome receives, mainly over
the apertures already plugged, a coat of plaster which makes the nest
look like new. If she has not finished her laying, the mother goes in
search of other old nests to complete it. Perhaps she does not decide
to found a new establishment except when she can find no second-hand
dwellings, which mean a great economy of time and labour. In short,
among the countless number of nests which I have collected, I find
many more ancient than recent ones.

How shall we distinguish one from the other? The outward aspect tells
you nothing, owing to the great care taken by the Mason to restore
the surface of the old dwelling equal to new. To resist the rigours
of the winter, this surface must be impregnable. The mother knows
that and therefore repairs the dome. Inside, it is another matter:
the old nest stands revealed at once. There are cells whose
provisions, at least a year old, are intact, but dried up or musty,
because the egg has never developed. There are others containing a
dead larva, reduced by time to a blackened, curled-up cylinder. There
are some whence the perfect insect was never able to issue: the
Chalicodoma wore herself out in trying to pierce the ceiling of her
chamber; her strength failed her and she perished in the attempt.
Others again and very many are occupied by ravagers, Leucopses (Cf.
"The Mason-bees": chapter 11.--Translator's Note.) and Anthrax-flies,
who will come out a good deal later, in July. Altogether, the house
is far from having every room vacant; there are nearly always a
considerable number occupied either by parasites that were still in
the egg-stage at the time when the Mason-bee was at work or by
damaged provisions, dried grubs or Chalicodomae in the perfect state
who have died without being able to effect their deliverance.

Should all the rooms be available, a rare occurrence, there still
remains a method of distinguishing between an ancient nest and a
recent one. The cocoon, as I have said, adheres pretty closely to the
walls; and the mother does not always take away this remnant, either
because she is unable to do so, or because she considers the removal
unnecessary. Thus the base of the new cocoon is set in the bottom of
the old cocoon. This double wrapper points very clearly to two
generations, two separate years. I have even found as many as three
cocoons fitting one into another at their bases. Consequently, the
nests of the Mason-bee of the Pebbles are able to do duty for three
years, if not more. Eventually they become utter ruins, abandoned to
the Spiders and to various smaller Bees or Wasps, who take up their
quarters in the crumbling rooms.

As we see, an old nest is hardly ever capable of containing the
Mason-bee's entire laying, which calls for some fifteen apartments.
The number of rooms at her disposal is most unequal, but always very
small. It is saying much when there are enough to receive about half
the laying. Four or five cells, sometimes two or even one: that is
what the Mason usually finds in a nest that is not her own work. This
large reduction is explained when we remember the numerous parasites
that live upon the unfortunate Bee.

Now, how are the sexes distributed in those layings which are
necessarily broken up between one old nest and another? They are
distributed in such a way as utterly to upset the idea of an
invariable succession first of females and then of males, the idea
which occurs to us on examining the new nests. If this rule were a
constant one, we should be bound to find in the old domes at one time
only females, at another only males, according as the laying was at
its first or at its second stage. The simultaneous presence of the
two sexes would then correspond with the transition period between
one stage and the next and should be very unusual. On the contrary,
it is very common; and, however few cells there may be, we always
find both females and males in the old nests, on the sole condition
that the compartments have the regulation holding-capacity, a large
capacity for the females, a lesser for the males, as we have seen.

The old male cells can be recognized by their position on the outer
edges and by their capacity, measuring on an average the same as a
column of sand 31 millimetres high in a glass tube 5 millimetres
wide. (1.21 x .195 inches.--Translator's Note.) These cells contain
males of the second or third generation and none but males. In the
old female cells, those in the middle, whose capacity is measured by
a similar column of sand 45 millimetres high (1.75 inches.--
Translator's Note.), are females and none but females.

This presence of both sexes at a time, even when there are but two
cells free, one spacious and the other small, proves in the plainest
fashion that the regular distribution observed in the complete nests
of recent production is here replaced by an irregular distribution,
harmonizing with the number and holding-capacity of the chambers to
be stocked. The Mason-bee has before her, let me suppose, only five
vacant cells: two larger and three smaller. The total space at her
disposal would do for about a third of the laying. Well, in the two
large cells, she puts females; in the three small cells, she puts
males.

As we find the same sort of thing in all the old nests, we must needs
admit that the mother knows the sex of the egg which she is going to
lay, because that egg is placed in a cell of the proper capacity. We
can go further and admit that the mother alters the order of
succession of the sexes at her pleasure, because her layings, between
one old nest and another, are broken up into small groups of males
and females according to the exigencies of space in the actual nest
which she happens to be occupying.

Just now, in the new nest, we saw the Mason-bee arranging her total
laying into series first of females and next of males; and here she
is, mistress of an old nest of which she has not the power to alter
the arrangement, breaking up her laying into sections comprising both
sexes just as required by the conditions imposed upon her. She
therefore decides the sex of the egg at will, for, without this
prerogative, she could not, in the chambers of the nest which she
owes to chance, deposit unerringly the sex for which those chambers
were originally built; and this happens however small the number of
chambers to be filled.

When the nest is new, I think I see a reason why the Mason-bee should
seriate her laying into females and then males. Her nest is a half-
sphere. That of the Mason-bee of the Shrubs is very nearly a sphere.
Of all shapes, the spherical shape is the strongest. Now these two
nests require an exceptional power of resistance. Without protection
of any kind, they have to brave the weather, one on its pebble, the
other on its bough. Their spherical configuration is therefore very
practical.

The nest of the Mason-bee of the Walls consists of a cluster of
upright cells backing against one another. For the whole to take a
spherical form, the height of the chambers must diminish from the
centre of the dome to the circumference. Their elevation is the sine
of the meridian arc starting from the plane of the pebble. Therefore,
if they are to have any solidity, there must be large cells in the
middle and small cells at the edges. And, as the work begins with the
central chambers and ends with those on the circumference, the laying
of the females, destined for the large cells, must precede that of
the males, destined for the small cells. So the females come first
and the males at the finish.

This is all very well when the mother herself founds the dwelling,
when she lays the first rows of bricks. But, when she is in the
presence of an old nest, of which she is quite unable to alter the
general arrangement, how is she to make use of the few vacant rooms,
the large and the small alike, if the sex of the egg be already
irrevocably fixed? She can only do so by abandoning the arrangement
in two consecutive rows and accommodating her laying to the varied
exigencies of the home. Either she finds it impossible to make an
economical use of the old nest, a theory refuted by the evidence, or
else she determines at will the sex of the egg which she is about to
lay.

The Osmiae themselves will furnish the most conclusive evidence on
the latter point. We have seen that these Bees are not generally
miners, who themselves dig out the foundation of their cells. They
make use of the old structures of others, or else of natural
retreats, such as hollow stems, the spirals of empty shells and
various hiding-places in walls, clay or wood. Their work is confined
to repairs to the house, such as partitions and covers. There are
plenty of these retreats; and the insect would always find first-
class ones if it thought of going any distance to look for them. But
the Osmia is a stay-at-home: she returns to her birth-place and
clings to it with a patience extremely difficult to exhaust. It is
here, in this little familiar corner, that she prefers to settle her
progeny. But then the apartments are few in number and of all shapes
and sizes. There are long and short ones, spacious ones and narrow.
Short of expatriating herself, a Spartan course, she has to use them
all, from first to last, for she has no choice. Guided by these
considerations, I embarked on the experiments which I will now
describe.

I have said how my study, on two separate occasions, became a
populous hive, in which the Three-horned Osmia built her nests in the
various appliances which I had prepared for her. Among these
appliances, tubes, either of glass or reed, predominated. There were
tubes of all lengths and widths. In the long tubes, entire or almost
entire layings, with a series of females followed by a series of
males, were deposited. As I have already referred to this result, I
will not discuss it again. The short tubes were sufficiently varied
in length to lodge one or other portion of the total laying. Basing
my calculations on the respective lengths of the cocoons of the two
sexes, on the thickness of the partitions and the final lid, I
shortened some of these to the exact dimensions required for two
cocoons only, of different sexes.

Well, these short tubes, whether of glass or reed, were seized upon
as eagerly as the long tubes. Moreover, they yielded this splendid
result: their contents, only a part of the total laying, always began
with female and ended with male cocoons. This order was invariable;
what varied was the number of cells in the long tubes and the
proportion between the two sorts of cocoons, sometimes males
predominating and sometimes females.

The experiment is of paramount importance; and it will perhaps make
the result clearer if I quote one instance from among a multitude of
similar cases. I give the preference to this particular instance
because of the rather exceptional fertility of the laying. An Osmia
marked on the thorax is watched, day by day, from the commencement to
the end of her work. From the 1st to the 10th of May, she occupies a
glass tube in which she lodges seven females followed by a male,
which ends the series. From the 10th to the 17th of May, she
colonizes a second tube, in which she lodges first three females and
then three males. From the 17th to the 25th of May, a third tube,
with three females and then two males. On the 26th of May, a fourth
tube, which she abandons, probably because of its excessive width,
after laying one female in it. Lastly, from the 26th to the 30th of
May, a fifth tube, which she colonizes with two females and three
males. Total: twenty-five Osmiae, including seventeen females and
eight males. And it will not be superfluous to observe that these
unfinished series do not in any way correspond with periods separated
by intervals of rest. The laying is continuous, in so far as the
variable condition of the atmosphere allows. As soon as one tube is
full and closed, another is occupied by the Osmia without delay.

The tubes reduced to the exact length of two cells fulfilled my
expectation in the great majority of cases: the lower cell was
occupied by a female and the upper by a male. There were a few
exceptions. More discerning than I in her estimate of what was
strictly necessary, better-versed in the economy of space, the Osmia
had found a way of lodging two females where I had only seen room for
one female and a male.

This experiment speaks volumes. When confronted with tubes too small
to receive all her family, she is in the same plight as the Mason-bee
in the presence of an old nest. She thereupon acts exactly as the
Chalicodoma does. She breaks up her laying, divides it into series as
short as the room at her disposal demands; and each series begins
with females and ends with males. This breaking up, on the one hand,
into sections in all of which both sexes are represented and the
division, on the other hand, of the entire laying into just two
groups, one female, the other male, when the length of the tube
permits, surely provide us with ample evidence of the insect's power
to regulate the sex of the egg according to the exigencies of space.

And besides the exigencies of space one might perhaps venture to add
those connected with the earlier development of the males. These
burst their cocoons a couple of weeks or more before the females;
they are the first who hasten to the sweets of the almond-tree. In
order to release themselves and emerge into the glad sunlight without
disturbing the string of cocoons wherein their sisters are still
sleeping, they must occupy the upper end of the row; and this, no
doubt, is the reason that makes the Osmia end each of her broken
layings with males. Being next to the door, these impatient ones will
leave the home without upsetting the shells that are slower in
hatching.

I experimented on Latreille's Osmia, using short and even very short
stumps of reed. All that I had to do was to lay them just beside the
nests of the Mason-bee of the Sheds, nests beloved by this particular
Osmia. Old, disused hurdles supplied me with reeds inhabited from end
to end by the Horned Osmia. In both cases I obtained the same results
and the same conclusions as with the Three-horned Osmia.

I return to the latter, nidifying under my eyes in some old nests of
the Mason-bee of the Walls, which I had placed within her reach,
mixed up with the tubes. Outside my study, I had never yet seen the
Three-horned Osmia adopt that domicile. This may be due to the fact
that these nests are isolated one by one in the fields; and the
Osmia, who loves to feel herself surrounded by her kin and to work in
plenty of company, refuses them because of this isolation. But on my
table, finding them close to the tubes in which the others are
working, she adopts them without hesitation.

The chambers presented by those old nests are more or less spacious
according to the thickness of the coat of mortar which the
Chalicodoma has laid over the assembled chambers. To leave her cell,
the Mason-bee has to perforate not only the plug, the lid built at
the mouth of the cell, but also the thick plaster wherewith the dome
is strengthened at the end of the work. The perforation results in a
vestibule which gives access to the chamber itself. It is this
vestibule which is sometimes longer and sometimes shorter, whereas
the corresponding chamber is of almost constant dimensions, in the
case of the same sex, of course.

We will first consider the short vestibule, at the most large enough
to receive the plug with which the Osmia will close up the lodging.
There is then nothing at her disposal except the cell proper, a
spacious apartment in which one of the Osmia's females will find
ample accommodation, for she is much smaller than the original
occupant of the chamber, no matter the sex; but there is not room for
two cocoons at a time, especially in view of the space taken up by
the intervening partition. Well, in those large, well-built chambers,
formerly the homes of Chalicodomae, the Osmia settles females and
none but females.

Let us now consider the long vestibule. Here, a partition is
constructed, encroaching slightly on the cell proper, and the
residence is divided into two unequal storeys, a large room below,
housing a female, and a narrow cabin above, containing a male.

When the length of the vestibule permits, allowing for the space
required by the outer stopper, a third storey is built, smaller than
the second; and another male is lodged in this cramped corner. In
this way the old nest of the Mason-bee of the Pebbles is colonized,
cell after cell, by a single mother.

The Osmia, as we see, is very frugal of the lodging that has fallen
to her share; she makes the best possible use of it, giving to the
females the spacious chambers of the Mason-bee and to the males the
narrow vestibules, subdivided into storeys when this is feasible.
Economy of space is the chief consideration, since her stay-at-home
tastes do not allow her to indulge in distant quests. She has to
employ the site which chance places at her disposal just as it is,
now for a male and now for a female. Here we see displayed, more
clearly than ever, her power of deciding the sex of the egg, in order
to adapt it judiciously to the conditions of the house-room
available.

I had offered at the same time to the Osmiae in my study some old
nests of the Mason-bee of the Shrubs, which are clay spheroids with
cylindrical cavities in them. These cavities are formed, as in the
old nests of the Mason-bee of the Pebbles, of the cell properly so-
called and of the exit-way which the perfect insect cut through the
outer coating at the time of its deliverance. Their diameter is about
seven millimetres (.273 inch.--Translator's Note.); their depth at
the centre of the heap is 23 millimetres (.897 inch.--Translator's
Note.); and at the edge averages 14 millimetres (.546 inch.--
Translator's Note.)

The deep central cells receive only the females of the Osmia;
sometimes even the two sexes together, with a partition in the
middle, the female occupying the lower and the male the upper storey.
True, in such cases economy of space is strained to the utmost, the
apartments provided by the Mason-bee of the Shrubs being very small
as it is, despite their entrance-halls. Lastly, the deeper cavities
on the circumference are allotted to females and the shallower to
males.

I will add that a single mother peoples each nest and also that she
proceeds from cell to cell without troubling to ascertain the depth.
She goes from the centre to the edges, from the edges to the centre,
from a deep cavity to a shallow cavity and vice versa, which she
would not do if the sexes were to follow upon each other in a settled
order. For greater certainty, I numbered the cells of one nest as
each of them was closed. On opening them later, I was able to see
that the sexes were not subjected to a chronological arrangement.
Females were succeeded by males and these by females without its
being possible for me to make out any regular sequence. Only--and
this is the essential point--the deep cavities were allotted to the
females and the shallow ones to the males.

We know that the Three-horned Osmia prefers to haunt the habitations
of the Bees who nidify in populous colonies, such as the Mason-bee of
the Sheds and the Hairy-footed Anthophora. Exercising the very
greatest care, I broke up some great lumps of earth removed from the
banks inhabited by the Anthophora and sent to me from Carpentras by
my dear friend and pupil M. Devillario. I examined them
conscientiously in the quiet of my study. I found the Osmia's cocoons
arranged in short series, in very irregular passages, the original
work of which is due to the Anthophora. Touched up afterwards, made
larger or smaller, lengthened or shortened, intersected with a
network of crossings by the numerous generations that had succeeded
one another in the same city, they formed an inextricable labyrinth.

Sometimes these corridors did not communicate with any adjoining
apartment; sometimes they gave access to the spacious chamber of the
Anthophora, which could be recognized, in spite of its age, by its
oval shape and its coating of glazed stucco. In the latter case, the
bottom cell, which once constituted, by itself, the chamber of the
Anthophora, was always occupied by a female Osmia. Beyond it, in the
narrow corridor, a male was lodged, not seldom two, or even three. Of
course, clay partitions, the work of the Osmia, separated the
different inhabitants, each of whom had his own storey, his own
closed cell.

When the accommodation consisted of no more than a simple cylinder,
with no state-bedroom at the end of it--a bedroom always reserved for
a female--the contents varied with the diameter of the cylinder. The
series, of which the longest were series of four, included, with a
wider diameter, first one or two females, then one or two males. It
also happened, though rarely, that the series was reversed, that is
to say, it began with males and ended with females. Lastly, there
were a good many isolated cocoons, of one sex or the other. When the
cocoon was alone and occupied the Anthophora's cell, it invariably
belonged to a female.

I have observed the same thing in the nests of the Mason-bee of the
Sheds, but not so easily. The series are shorter here, because the
Mason-bee does not bore galleries but builds cell upon cell. The work
of the whole swarm thus forms a stratum of cells that grows thicker
from year to year. The corridors occupied by the Osmia are the holes
which the Mason-bee dug in order to reach daylight from the deep
layers. In these short series, both sexes are usually present; and,
if the Mason-bee's chamber is at the end of the passage, it is
inhabited by a female Osmia.

We come back to what the short tubes and the old nests of the Mason-
bee of the Pebbles have already taught us. The Osmia who, in tubes of
sufficient length, divides her whole laying into a continuous
sequence of females and a continuous sequence of males, now breaks it
up into short series in which both sexes are present. She adapts her
sectional layings to the exigencies of a chance lodging; she always
places a female in the sumptuous chamber which the Mason-bee or the
Anthophora occupied originally.

Facts even more striking are supplied by the old nests of the Masked
Anthophora (A. personata, ILLIG.), old nests which I have seen
utilized by the Horned Osmia and the Three-horned Osmia at the same
time. Less frequently, the same nests serve for Latreille's Osmia.
Let us first describe the Masked Anthophora's nests.

In a steep bank of sandy clay, we find a set of round, wide-open
holes. There are generally only a few of them, each about half an
inch in diameter. They are the entrance-doors leading to the
Anthophora's abode, doors always left open, even after the building
is finished. Each of them gives access to a short passage, sometimes
straight, sometimes winding, nearly horizontal, polished with minute
care and varnished with a sort of white glaze. It looks as if it had
received a thin coat of whitewash. On the inner surface of this
passage, in the thickness of the earthy bank, spacious oval niches
have been excavated, communicating with the corridor by means of a
narrow bottle-neck, which is closed, when the work is done, with a
substantial mortar stopper. The Anthophora polishes the outside of
this stopper so well, smooths its surface so perfectly, bringing it
to the same level as that of the passage, is so careful to give it
the white tint of the rest of the wall that, when the job is
finished, it becomes absolutely impossible to distinguish the
entrance-door corresponding with each cell.

The cell is an oval cavity dug in the earthy mass. The wall has the
same polish, the same chalky whiteness as the general passage. But
the Anthophora does not limit herself to digging oval niches: to make
her work more solid, she pours over the walls of the chamber a
salivary liquid which not only whitens and varnishes but also
penetrates to a depth of some millimetres into the sandy earth, which
it turns into a hard cement. A similar precaution is taken with the
passage; and therefore the whole is a solid piece of work capable of
remaining in excellent condition for years.

Moreover, thanks to the wall hardened by the salivary fluid, the
structure can be removed from its matrix by chipping it carefully
away. We thus obtain, at least in fragments, a serpentine tube from
which hangs a single or double row of oval nodules that look like
large grapes drawn out lengthwise. Each of these nodules is a cell,
the entrance to which, carefully hidden, opens into the tube or
passage. When she wishes to leave her cell, in the spring, the
Anthophora destroys the mortar disk that closes the jar and thus
reaches the general corridor, which is quite open to the outer air.
The abandoned nest provides a series of pear-shaped cavities, of
which the distended part is the old cell and the contracted part the
exit-neck, rid of its stopper.

These pear-shaped hollows form splendid lodgings, impregnable
strongholds, in which the Osmiae find a safe and commodious retreat
for their families. The Horned Osmia and the Three-horned Osmia
establish themselves there at the same time. Although it is a little
too large for her, Latrielle's Osmia also appears very well satisfied
with it.

I have examined some forty of the superb cells utilized by each of
the first two. The great majority are divided into two storeys by
means of a transversal partition. The lower storey includes the
larger portion of the Anthophora's cell; the upper storey includes
the rest of the cell and a little of the bottle-neck that surmounts
it. The two-roomed dwelling is closed, in the passage, by a
shapeless, bulky mass of dried mud. What a clumsy artist the Osmia
is, compared with the  Anthophora! Against the exquisite work of the
Anthophora, partition and plug strike a note as hideously incongruous
as a lump of dirt on polished marble.

The two apartments thus obtained are of a very unequal capacity,
which at once strikes the observer. I measured them with my five-
millimetre tube. On an average, the bottom one is represented by a
column of sand 50 millimetres deep (1.95 inches.--Translator's Note.)
and the top one by a column of 15 millimetres (.585 inch.--
Translator's Note.). The holding-capacity of the one is therefore
about three times as large as that of the other. The cocoons enclosed
present the same disparity. The bottom one is big, the top one small.
Lastly, the lower one belongs to a female Osmia and the upper to a
male Osmia.

Occasionally the length of the bottle-neck allows of a fresh
arrangement and the cavity is divided into three storeys. The bottom
one, which is always the most spacious, contains a female; the two
above, both smaller than the first and one smaller than the other,
contain males.

Let us keep to the first case, which is always the most frequent. The
Osmia is in the presence of one of these pear-shaped hollows. It is a
find that must be employed to the best advantage: a prize of this
sort is rare and falls only to fortune's favourites. To lodge two
females in it at once is impossible; there is not sufficient room. To
lodge two males in it would be undue generosity to a sex that is
entitled to but the smallest consideration. Besides, the two sexes
must be represented in almost equal numbers. The Osmia decides upon
one female, whose portion shall be the better room, the lower one,
which is larger, better-protected and more nicely polished, and one
male, whose portion shall be the upper storey, a cramped attic,
uneven and rugged in the part which encroaches on the bottle-neck.
This decision is proved by numerous undeniable facts. Both Osmiae
therefore can choose the sex of the egg about to be laid, seeing that
they are now breaking up the laying into groups of two, a female and
a male, as required by the conditions of the lodging.

I have only once found Latreille's Osmia established in the nest of
the Masked Anthophora. She had occupied but a small number of cells,
because the others were not free, being inhabited by the Anthophora.
The cells in question were divided into three storeys by partitions
of green mortar; the lower storey was occupied by a female, the two
others by males, with smaller cocoons.

I came to an even more remarkable example. Two Anthidia of my
district, A. septemdentatum, LATR., and A. bellicosum, LEP., adopt as
the home of their offspring the empty shells of different snails:
Helix aspersa, H. algira, H. nemoralis, H. caespitum. The first-
named, the Common Snail, is the most often used, under the stone-
heaps and in the crevices of old walls. Both Anthidia colonize only
the second whorl of the spiral. The central part is too small and
remains unoccupied. Even so with the front whorl, the largest, which
is left completely empty, so much so that, on looking through the
opening, it is impossible to tell whether the shell does or does not
contain the Bee's nest. We have to break this last whorl if we would
perceive the curious nest tucked away in the spiral.

We then find first a transversal partition, formed of tiny bits of
gravel cemented by a putty made from resin, which is collected in
fresh drops from the oxycedrus and the Aleppo pine. Beyond this is a
stout barricade made up of rubbish of all kinds: bits of gravel,
scraps of earth, juniper-needles, the catkins of the conifers, small
shells, dried excretions of Snails. Next come a partition of pure
resin, a large cocoon in a roomy chamber, a second partition of pure
resin and, lastly, a smaller cocoon in a narrow chamber. The
inequality of the two cells is the necessary consequence of the shape
of the shell, whose inner space gains rapidly in width as the spiral
gets nearer to the orifice. Thus, by the mere general arrangement of
the home and without any work on the Bee's part beyond some slender
partitions, a large room is marked out in front and a much smaller
room at the back.

By a very remarkable exception, which I have mentioned casually
elsewhere, the males of the genus Anthidium are generally larger than
the females; and this is the case with the two species in particular
that divide the Snail's spiral with resin partitions. I collected
some dozens of nests of both species. In at least half the cases, the
two sexes were present together; the female, the smaller, occupied
the front cell and the male, the bigger, the back cell. Other cells,
which were smaller or too much obstructed at the back by the dried-up
remains of the Mollusc, contained only one cell, occupied at one time
by a female and at another by a male. A few, lastly, had both cells
inhabited now by two males and now by two females. The most frequent
arrangement was the simultaneous presence of both sexes, with the
female in front and the male behind. The Anthidia who make resin-
dough and live in Snail-shells can therefore alternate the sexes
regularly to meet the exigencies of the spiral dwelling-house.

One more thing and I have done. My apparatus of reeds, fixed against
the walls of the garden, supplied me with a remarkable nest of the
Horned Osmia. The nest is established in a bit of reed 11 millimetres
wide inside. (.429 inch--Translator's Note.) It comprises thirteen
cells and occupies only half the cylinder, although the orifice is
plugged with the usual stopper. The laying therefore seems here to be
complete.

Well, this laying is arranged in a most singular fashion. There is
first, at a suitable distance from the bottom or the node of the
reed, a transversal partition, perpendicular to the axis of the tube.
This marks off a cell of unusual size, in which a female is lodged.
After that, in view of the excessive width of the tunnel, which is
too great for a series in single file, the Osmia appears to alter her
mind. She therefore builds a partition perpendicular to the
transversal partition which she has just constructed and thus divides
the second storey into two rooms, a larger room, in which she lodges
a female, and a smaller, in which she lodges a male. She next builds
a second transversal partition and a second longitudinal partition
perpendicular to it. These once more give two unequal chambers,
stocked likewise, the large one with a female, the smaller one with a
male.

>From this third storey onwards, the Osmia abandons geometrical
accuracy; the architect seems to be a little out in her reckoning.
The transversal partitions become more and more slanting and the work
grows irregular, but always with a sprinkling of large chambers for
the females and small chambers for the males. Three females and two
males are housed in this way, the sexes alternating.

By the time that the base of the eleventh cell is reached, the
transversal partition is once more almost perpendicular to the axis.
Here what happened at the bottom is repeated. There is no
longitudinal partition; and the spacious cell, covering the whole
diameter of the cylinder, receives a female. The edifice ends with
two transversal partitions and one longitudinal partition, which mark
out, on the same level, chambers twelve and thirteen, both of which
contain males.

There is nothing more curious than this mixing of the two sexes, when
we know with what precision the Osmia separates them in a linear
series, where the narrow width of the cylinder demands that the cells
shall be set singly, one above the other. Here, the Bee is making use
of a tube whose diameter is not suited to her work; she is
constructing a complex and difficult edifice, which perhaps would not
possess the necessary solidity if the ceilings were too broad. The
Osmia therefore supports these ceilings with longitudinal partitions;
and the unequal chambers resulting from the introduction of these
partitions receive females at one time and males at another,
according to their capacity.


CHAPTER 5. PERMUTATIONS OF SEX.

The sex of the egg is optional. The choice rests with the mother, who
is guided by considerations of space and, according to the
accommodation at her disposal, which is frequently fortuitous and
incapable of modification, places a female in this cell and a male in
that, so that both may have a dwelling of a size suited to their
unequal development. This is the unimpeachable evidence of the
numerous and varied facts which I have set forth. People unfamiliar
with insect anatomy--the public for whom I write--would probably give
the following explanation of this marvellous prerogative of the Bee:
the mother has at her disposal a certain number of eggs, some of
which are irrevocably female and the others irrevocably male: she is
able to pick out of either group the one which she wants at the
actual moment; and her choice is decided by the holding capacity of
the cell that has to be stocked. Everything would then be limited to
a judicious selection from the heap of eggs.

Should this idea occur to him, the reader must hasten to reject it.
Nothing could be more false, as the merest reference to anatomy will
show. The female reproductive apparatus of the Hymenoptera consists
generally of six ovarian tubes, something like glove-fingers, divided
into bunches of three and ending in a common canal, the oviduct,
which carries the eggs outside. Each of these glove-fingers is fairly
wide at the base, but tapers sharply towards the tip, which is
closed. It contains, arranged in a row, one after the other, like
beads on a string, a certain number of eggs, five or six for
instance, of which the lower ones are more or less developed, the
middle ones half-way towards maturity, and the upper ones very
rudimentary. Every stage of evolution is here represented,
distributed regularly from bottom to top, from the verge of maturity
to the vague outlines of the embryo. The sheath clasps its string of
ovules so closely that any inversion of the order is impossible.
Besides, an inversion would result in a gross absurdity: the
replacing of a riper egg by another in an earlier stage of
development.

Therefore, in each ovarian tube, in each glove-finger, the emergence
of the eggs occurs according to the order governing their arrangement
in the common sheath; and any other sequence is absolutely
impossible. Moreover, at the nesting period, the six ovarian sheaths,
one by one and each in its turn, have at their base an egg which in a
very short time swells enormously. Some hours or even a day before
the laying, that egg by itself represents or even exceeds in bulk the
whole of the ovigenous apparatus. This is the egg which is on the
point of being laid. It is about to descend into the oviduct, in its
proper order, at its proper time; and the mother has no power to make
another take its place. It is this egg, necessarily this egg and no
other, that will presently be laid upon the provisions, whether these
be a mess of honey or a live prey; it alone is ripe, it alone is at
the entrance to the oviduct; none of the others, since they are
farther back in the row and not at the right stage of development,
can be substituted at this crisis. Its birth is inevitable.

What will it yield, a male or a female? No lodging has been prepared,
no food collected for it; and yet both food and lodging have to be in
keeping with the sex that will proceed from it. And here is a much
more puzzling condition: the sex of that egg, whose advent is
predestined, has to correspond with the space which the mother
happens to have found for a cell. There is therefore no room for
hesitation, strange though the statement may appear: the egg, as it
descends from its ovarian tube, has no determined sex. It is perhaps
during the few hours of its rapid development at the base of its
ovarian sheath, it is perhaps on its passage through the oviduct that
it receives, at the mother's pleasure, the final impress that will
produce, to match the cradle which it has to fill, either a female or
a male.

Thereupon the following question presents itself. Let us admit that,
when the normal conditions remain, a laying would have yielded m
females and n males. Then, if my conclusions are correct, it must be
in the mother's power, when the conditions are different, to take
from the m group and increase the n group to the same extent; it must
be possible for her laying to be represented as m-1, m-2, m-3, etc.
females and by n+1, n+2, n+3, etc. males, the sum of m+n remaining
constant, but one of the sexes being partly permuted into the other.
The ultimate conclusion even cannot be disregarded: we must admit a
set of eggs represented by m-m, or zero, females and of n+m males,
one of the sexes being completely replaced by the other. Conversely,
it must be possible for the feminine series to be augmented from the
masculine series to the extent of absorbing it entirely. It was to
solve this question and some others connected with it that I
undertook, for the second time, to rear the Three-horned Osmia in my
study.

The problem on this occasion is a more delicate one; but I am also
better-equipped. My apparatus consists of two small, closed packing-
cases, with the front side of each pierced with forty holes, in which
I can insert my glass tubes and keep them in a horizontal position. I
thus obtain for the Bees the darkness and mystery which suit their
work and for myself the power of withdrawing from my hive, at any
time, any tube that I wish, with the Osmia inside, so as to carry it
to the light and follow, if need be with the aid of the lens, the
operations of the busy worker. My investigations, however frequent
and minute, in no way hinder the peaceable Bee, who remains absorbed
in her maternal duties.

I mark a plentiful number of my guests with a variety of dots on the
thorax, which enables me to follow any one Osmia from the beginning
to the end of her laying. The tubes and their respective holes are
numbered; a list, always lying open on my desk, enables me to note
from day to day, sometimes from hour to hour, what happens in each
tube and particularly the actions of the Osmiae whose backs bear
distinguishing marks. As soon as one tube is filled, I replace it by
another. Moreover, I have scattered in front of either hive a few
handfuls of empty Snail-shells, specially chosen for the object which
I have in view. Reasons which I will explain later led me to prefer
the shells of Helix caespitum. Each of the shells, as and when
stocked, received the date of the laying and the alphabetical sign
corresponding with the Osmia to whom it belonged. In this way, I
spent five or six weeks in continual observation. To succeed in an
enquiry, the first and foremost condition is patience. This condition
I fulfilled; and it was rewarded with the success which I was
justified in expecting.

The tubes employed are of two kinds. The first, which are cylindrical
and of the same width throughout, will be of use for confirming the
facts observed in the first year of my experiments in indoor rearing.
The others, the majority, consist of two cylinders which are of very
different diameters, set end to end. The front cylinder, the one
which projects a little way outside the hive and forms the entrance-
hole, varies in width between 8 and 12 millimetres. (Between .312 to
.468 inch.--Translator's Note.) The second, the back one, contained
entirely within my packing-case, is closed at its far end and is 5 to
6 millimetres (.195 to .234 inch.--Translator's Note.) in diameter.
Each of the two parts of the double-galleried tunnel, one narrow and
one wide, measures at most a decimetre (3.9 inches.--Translator's
Note.) in length. I thought it advisable to have these short tubes,
as the Osmia is thus compelled to select different lodgings, each of
them being insufficient in itself to accommodate the total laying. In
this way I shall obtain a greater variety in the distribution of the
sexes. Lastly, at the mouth of each tube, which projects slightly
outside the case, there is a little paper tongue, forming a sort of
perch on which the Osmia alights on her arrival and giving easy
access to the house. With these facilities, the swarm colonized
fifty-two double-galleried tubes, thirty-seven cylindrical tubes,
seventy-eight Snail-shells and a few old nests of the Mason-bee of
the Shrubs. From this rich mine of material I will take what I want
to prove my case.

Every series, even when incomplete, begins with females and ends with
males. To this rule I have not yet found an exception, at least in
galleries of normal diameter. In each new abode, the mother busies
herself first of all with the more important sex. Bearing this point
in mind, would it be possible for me, by manoeuvring, to obtain an
inversion of this order and make the laying begin with males? I think
so, from the results already ascertained and the irresistible
conclusions to be drawn from them. The double-galleried tubes are
installed in order to put my conjectures to the proof.

The back gallery, 5 or 6 millimetres (.195 to .234 inch.--
Translator's Note.) wide, is too narrow to serve as a lodging for
normally developed females. If, therefore, the Osmia, who is very
economical of her space, wishes to occupy them, she will be obliged
to establish males there. And her laying must necessarily begin here,
because this corner is the rear-most part of the tube. The foremost
gallery is wide, with an entrance-door on the front of the hive.
Here, finding the conditions to which she is accustomed, the mother
will go on with her laying in the order which she prefers.

Let us now see what has happened. Of the fifty-two double galleried
tubes, about a third did not have their narrow passage colonized. The
Osmia closed its aperture communicating with the large passage; and
the latter alone received the eggs. This waste of space was
inevitable. The female Osmiae, though nearly always larger than the
males, present marked differences among one another: some are bigger,
some are smaller. I had to adjust the width of the narrow galleries
to Bees of average dimensions. It may happen therefore that a gallery
is too small to admit the large-sized mothers to whom chance allots
it. When the Osmia is unable to enter the tube, obviously she will
not colonize it. She then closes the entrance to this space which she
cannot use and does her laying beyond it, in the wide tube. Had I
tried to avoid these useless apparatus by choosing tubes of larger
calibre, I should have encountered another drawback: the medium-sized
mothers, finding themselves almost comfortable, would have decided to
lodge females there. I had to be prepared for it: as each mother
selected her house at will and as I was unable to interfere in her
choice, a narrow tube would be colonized or not, according as the
Osmia who owned it was or was not able to make her way inside.

There remain some forty pairs of tubes with both galleries colonized.
In these there are two things to take into consideration. The narrow
rear tubes of 5 or 5 1/2 millimetres (.195 to .214 inch.--
Translator's Note.)--and these are the most numerous--contain males
and males only, but in short series, between one and five. The mother
is here so much hampered in her work that they are rarely occupied
from end to end; the Osmia seems in a hurry to leave them and to go
and colonize the front tube, whose ample space will leave her the
liberty of movement necessary for her operations. The other rear
tubes, the minority, whose diameter is about 6 millimetres (.234
inch.--Translator's Note.), contain sometimes only females and
sometimes females at the back and males towards the opening. One can
see that a tube a trifle wider and a mother slightly smaller would
account for this difference in the results. Nevertheless, as the
necessary space for a female is barely provided in this case, we see
that the mother avoids as far as she can a two-sex arrangement
beginning with males and that she adopts it only in the last
extremity. Finally, whatever the contents of the small tube may be,
those of the large one, following upon it, never vary and consist of
females at the back and males in front.

Though incomplete, because of circumstances very difficult to
control, the result of the experiment is none the less very striking.
Twenty-five apparatus contain only males in their narrow gallery, in
numbers varying from a minimum of one to a maximum of five. After
these comes the colony of the large gallery, beginning with females
and ending with males. And the layings in these apparatus do not
always belong to late summer or even to the intermediate period: a
few small tubes contain the earliest eggs of the Osmiae. A couple of
Osmiae, more forward than the others, set to work on the 23rd of
April. Both of them started their laying by placing males in the
narrow tubes. The meagre supply of provisions was enough in itself to
show the sex, which proved later to be in accordance with my
anticipations. We see then that, by my artifices, the whole swarm
starts with the converse of the normal order. This inversion is
continued, at no matter what period, from the beginning to the end of
the operations. The series which, according to rule, would begin with
females now begins with males. Once the larger gallery is reached,
the laying is pursued in the usual order.

We have advanced one step and that no small one: we have seen that
the Osmia, when circumstances require it, is capable of reversing the
sequence of the sexes. Would it be possible, provided that the tube
were long enough, to obtain a complete inversion, in which the entire
series of the males should occupy the narrow gallery at the back and
the entire series of the females the roomy gallery in front? I think
not; and I will tell you why.

Long and narrow cylinders are by no means to the Osmia's taste, not
because of their narrowness but because of their length. Remember
that for each load of honey brought the worker is obliged to move
backwards twice. She enters, head first, to begin by disgorging the
honey-syrup from her crop. Unable to turn in a passage which she
blocks entirely, she goes out backwards, crawling rather than
walking, a laborious performance on the polished surface of the glass
and a performance which, with any other surface, would still be very
awkward, as the wings are bound to rub against the wall with their
free end and are liable to get rumpled or bent. She goes out
backwards, reaches the outside, turns round and goes in again, but
this time the opposite way, so as to brush off the load of pollen
from her abdomen on to the heap. If the gallery is at all long, this
crawling backwards becomes troublesome after a time; and the Osmia
soon abandons a passage that is too small to allow of free movement.
I have said that the narrow tubes of my apparatus are, for the most
part, only very incompletely colonized. The Bee, after lodging a
small number of males in them, hastens to leave them. In the wide
front gallery, she can stay where she is and still be able to turn
round easily for her different manipulations; she will avoid those
two long journeys backwards, which are so exhausting and so bad for
her wings.

Another reason no doubt prompts her not to make too great a use of
the narrow passage, in which she would establish males, followed by
females in the part where the gallery widens. The males have to leave
their cells a couple of weeks or more before the females. If they
occupy the back of the house, they will die prisoners or else they
will overturn everything on their way out. This risk is avoided by
the order which the Osmia adopts.

In my tubes with their unusual arrangement, the mother might well
find the dilemma perplexing: there is the narrowness of the space at
her disposal and there is the emergence later on. In the narrow
tubes, the width is insufficient for the females; on the other hand,
if she lodges males there, they are liable to perish, since they will
be prevented from issuing at the proper moment. This would perhaps
explain the mother's hesitation and her obstinacy in settling females
in some of my apparatus which looked as if they could suit none but
males.

A suspicion occurs to me, a suspicion aroused by my attentive
examination of the narrow tubes. All, whatever the number of their
inmates, are carefully plugged at the opening, just as separate tubes
would be. It might therefore be the case that the narrow gallery at
the back was looked upon by the Osmia not as the prolongation of the
large front gallery, but as an independent tube. The facility with
which the worker turns as soon as she reaches the wide tube, her
liberty of action, which is now as great as in a doorway
communicating with the outer air, might well be misleading and cause
the Osmia to treat the narrow passage at the back as though the wide
passage in front did not exist. This would account for the placing of
the female in the large tube above the males in the small tube, an
arrangement contrary to her custom.

I will not undertake to decide whether the mother really appreciates
the danger of my snares, or whether she makes a mistake in
considering only the space at her disposal and beginning with males.
At any rate, I perceive in her a tendency to deviate as little as
possible from the order which safeguards the emergence of the two
sexes. This tendency is demonstrated by her repugnance to colonizing
my narrow tubes with long series of males. However, so far as we are
concerned, it does not matter much what passes at such times in the
Osmia's little brain. Enough for us to know that she dislikes narrow
and long tubes, not because they are narrow, but because they are at
the same time long.

And, in fact, she does very well with a short tube of the same
diameter. Such are the cells in the old nests of the Mason-bee of the
Shrubs and the empty shells of the Garden Snail. With the short tube,
the two disadvantages of the long tube are avoided. She has very
little of that crawling backwards to do when she has a Snail-shell
for the home of her eggs and scarcely any when the home is the cell
of the Mason-bee. Moreover, as the stack of cocoons numbers two or
three at most, the deliverance will be exempt from the difficulties
attached to a long series. To persuade the Osmia to nidify in a
single tube long enough to receive the whole of her laying and at the
same time narrow enough to leave her only just the possibility of
admittance appears to me a project without the slightest chance of
success: the Bee would stubbornly refuse such a dwelling or would
content herself with entrusting only a very small portion of her eggs
to it. On the other hand, with narrow but short cavities, success,
without being easy, seems to me at least quite possible. Guided by
these considerations, I embarked upon the most arduous part of my
problem: to obtain the complete or almost complete permutation of one
sex with the other; to produce a laying consisting only of males by
offering the mother a series of lodgings suited only to males.

Let us in the first place consult the old nests of the Mason-bee of
the Shrubs. I have said that these mortar spheroids, pierced all over
with little cylindrical cavities, are adopted pretty eagerly by the
Three-horned Osmia, who colonizes them before my eyes with females in
the deep cells and males in the shallow cells. That is how things go
when the old nest remains in its natural state. With a grater,
however, I scrape the outside of another nest so as to reduce the
depth of the cavities to some ten millimetres. (About two-fifths of
an inch.--Translator's Note.) This leaves in each cell just room for
one cocoon, surmounted by the closing stopper. Of the fourteen
cavities in the nests, I leave two intact, measuring fifteen
millimetres in depth. (.585 inch.--Translator's Note.) Nothing could
be more striking than the result of this experiment, made in the
first year of my home rearing. The twelve cavities whose depth had
been reduced all received males; the two cavities left untouched
received females.

A year passes and I repeat the experiment with a nest of fifteen
cells; but this time all the cells are reduced to the minimum depth
with the grater. Well, the fifteen cells, from first to last, are
occupied by males. It must be quite understood that, in each case,
all the offspring belonged to one mother, marked with her
distinguishing spot and kept in sight as long as her laying lasted.
He would indeed be difficult to please who refused to bow before the
results of these two experiments. If, however, he is not yet
convinced, here is something to remove his last doubts.

The Three-horned Osmia often settles her family in old shells,
especially those of the Common Snail (Helix aspersa), who is so
common under the stone-heaps and in the crevices of the little
unmortared walls that support our terraces. In this species, the
spiral is wide open, so that the Osmia, penetrating as far down as
the helical passage permits, finds, immediately above the point which
is too narrow to pass, the space necessary for the cell of a female.
This cell is succeeded by others, wider still, always for females,
arranged in a line in the same way as in a straight tube. In the last
whorl of the spiral, the diameter would be too great for a single
row. Then longitudinal partitions are added to the transverse
partitions, the whole resulting in cells of unequal dimensions in
which males predominate, mixed with a few females in the lower
storeys. The sequence of the sexes is therefore what it would be in a
straight tube and especially in a tube with a wide bore, where the
partitioning is complicated by subdivisions on the same level. A
single Snail-shell contains room for six or eight cells. A large,
rough earthen stopper finishes the nest at the entrance to the shell.

As a dwelling of this sort could show us nothing new, I chose for my
swarm the Garden Snail (Helix caespitum), whose shell, shaped like a
small, swollen Ammonite, widens by slow degrees, the diameter of the
usable portion, right up to the mouth, being hardly greater than that
required by a male Osmia-cocoon. Moreover, the widest part, in which
a female might find room, has to receive a thick stopping-plug, below
which there will often be a free space. Under all these conditions,
the house will hardly suit any but males arranged one after the
other.

The collection of shells placed at the foot of each hive includes
specimens of different sizes. The smallest are 18 millimetres (.7
inch.--Translator's Note.) in diameter and the largest 24 millimetres
(.936 inch.--Translator's Note.) There is room for two cocoons, or
three at most, according to their dimensions.

Now these shells were used by my visitors without any hesitation,
perhaps even with more eagerness than the glass tubes, whose slippery
sides might easily be a little annoying to the Bee. Some of them were
occupied on the first few days of the laying; and the Osmia who had
started with a home of this sort would pass next to a second Snail-
shell, in the immediate neighbourhood of the first, to a third, a
fourth and others still, always close to one another, until her
ovaries were emptied. The whole family of one mother would thus be
lodged in Snail-shells which were duly marked with the date of the
laying and a description of the worker. The faithful adherents of the
Snail-shell were in the minority. The greater number left the tubes
to come to the shells and then went back from the shells to the
tubes. All, after filling the spiral staircase with two or three
cells, closed the house with a thick earthen stopper on a level with
the opening. It was a long and troublesome task, in which the Osmia
displayed all her patience as a mother and all her talents as a
plasterer. There were even some who, scrupulous to excess, carefully
cemented the umbilicus, a hole which seemed to inspire them with
distrust as being able to give access to the interior of the
dwelling. It was a dangerous-looking cavity, which for the greater
safety of the family it was prudent to block up.

When the pupae are sufficiently matured, I proceed to examine these
elegant abodes. The contents fill me with joy: they fulfil my
anticipations to the letter. The great, the very great majority of
the cocoons turn out to be males; here and there, in the bigger
cells, a few rare females appear. The smallness of the space has
almost done away with the sixty-eight Snail-shells colonized. But, of
this total number, I must use only those series which received an
entire laying and were occupied by the same Osmia from the beginning
to the end of the egg-season. Here are a few examples, taken from
among the most conclusive.

>From the 6th of May, when she started operations, to the 25th of May,
the date at which her laying ceased, the Osmia occupied seven Snail-
shells in succession. Her family consists of fourteen cocoons, a
number very near the average; and, of these fourteen cocoons, twelve
belong to males and only two to females. These occupy the seventh and
thirteenth places in chronological order.

Another, between the 9th and 27th of May, stocked six Snail-shells
with a family of thirteen, including ten males and three females. The
places occupied by the latter in the series were numbers 3, 4 and 5.

A third, between the 2nd and 29th of May, colonized eleven Snail-
shells, a prodigious task. This industrious one was also exceedingly
prolific. She supplied me with a family of twenty-six, the largest
which I have ever obtained from one Osmia. Well, this abnormal
progeny consisted of twenty-five males and one female, one alone,
occupying place 17.

There is no need to go on, after this magnificent example, especially
as the other series would all, without exception, give us the same
result. Two facts are immediately obvious. The Osmia is able to
reverse the order of her laying and to start with a more or less long
series of males before producing any females. In the first case, the
first female appears as number 7; in the third, as number 17. There
is something better still; and this is the proposition which I was
particularly anxious to prove: the female sex can be permuted with
the male sex and can be permuted to the point of disappearing
altogether. We see this especially in the third case, where the
presence of a solitary female in a family of twenty-six is due to the
somewhat larger diameter of the corresponding Snail-shell and also,
no doubt, to some mistake on the mother's part, for the female
cocoon, in a series of two, occupies the upper storey, the one next
to the orifice, an arrangement which the Osmia appears to me to
dislike.

This result throws so much light on one of the darkest corners of
biology that I must attempt to corroborate it by means of even more
conclusive experiments. I propose next year to give the Osmiae
nothing but Snail-shells for a lodging, picked out one by one, and
rigorously to deprive the swarm of any other retreat in which the
laying could be effected. Under these conditions, I ought to obtain
nothing but males, or nearly, for the whole swarm.

There would still remain the inverse permutation: to obtain only
females and no males, or very few. The first permutation makes the
second seem very probable, although I cannot as yet conceive a means
of realizing it. The only condition which I can regulate is the
dimensions of the home. When the rooms are small, the males abound
and the females tend to disappear. With generous quarters, the
converse would not take place. I should obtain females and afterwards
an equal number of males, confined in small cells which, in case of
need, would be bounded by numerous partitions. The factor of space
does not enter into the question here. What artifice can we then
employ to provoke this second permutation? So far, I can think of
nothing that is worth attempting.

It is time to conclude. Leading a retired life, in the solitude of a
village, having quite enough to do with patiently and obscurely
ploughing my humble furrow, I know little about modern scientific
views. In my young days I had a passionate longing for books and
found it difficult to procure them; to-day, when I could almost have
them if I wanted, I am ceasing to wish for them. It is what usually
happens as life goes on. I do not therefore know what may have been
done in the direction whither this study of the sexes has led us. If
I am stating propositions that are really new or at least more
comprehensive than the propositions already known, my words will
perhaps sound heretical. No matter: as a simple translator of facts,
I do not hesitate to make my statement, being fully persuaded that
time will turn my heresy into orthodoxy. I will therefore
recapitulate my conclusions.

Bees lay their eggs in series of first females and then males, when
the two sexes are of different sizes and demand an unequal quantity
of nourishment. When the two sexes are alike in size, the same
sequence may occur, but less regularly.

This dual arrangement disappears when the place chosen for the nest
is not large enough to contain the entire laying. We then see broken
layings, beginning with females and ending with males.

The egg, as it issues from the ovary, has not yet a fixed sex. The
final impress that produces the sex is given at the moment of laying
or a little before.

So as to be able to give each larva the amount of space and food that
suits it according as it is male or female, the mother can choose the
sex of the egg which she is about to lay. To meet the conditions of
the building, which is often the work of another or else a natural
retreat that admits of little or no alteration, she lays either a
male egg or a female egg as she pleases. The distribution of the
sexes depends upon herself. Should circumstances require it, the
order of the laying can be reversed and begin with males; lastly, the
entire laying can contain only one sex.

The same privilege is possessed by the predatory Hymenoptera, the
Wasps, at least by those in whom the two sexes are of a different
size and consequently require an amount of nourishment that is larger
in the one case than in the other. The mother must know the sex of
the egg which she is going to lay; she must be able to choose the sex
of that egg so that each larva may obtain its proper portion of food.

Generally speaking, when the sexes are of different sizes, every
insect that collects food and prepares or selects a dwelling for its
offspring must be able to choose the sex of the egg in order to
satisfy without mistake the conditions imposed upon it.

The question remains how this optional assessment of the sexes is
effected. I know absolutely nothing about it. If I should ever learn
anything about this delicate point, I shall owe it to some happy
chance for which I must wait, or rather watch, patiently. Towards the
end of my investigations, I heard of a German theory which relates to
the Hive-bee and comes from Dzierzon, the apiarist. (Johann Dzierzon,
author of "Theorie und Praxis des neuen Bienenfreundes."--
Translator's Note.) If I understand it aright, according to the very
incomplete documents which I have before me, the egg, as it issues
from the ovary, is said already to possess a sex, which is always the
same; it is originally male; and it becomes female by fertilization.
The males are supposed to proceed from non-fertilized eggs, the
females from fertilized eggs. The Queen-bee would thus lay female
eggs or male eggs according as she fertilized them or not while they
were passing into her oviduct.

Coming from Germany, this theory cannot but inspire me with profound
distrust. As it has been given acceptance, with rash precipitancy, in
standard works, I will overcome my reluctance to devoting my
attention to Teutonic ideas and will submit it not to the test of
argument, which can always be met by an opposite argument, but to the
unanswerable test of facts.

For this optional fertilization, determining the sex, the mother's
organism requires a seminal reservoir which distils its drop of sperm
upon the egg contained in the oviduct and thus gives it a feminine
character, or else leaves it its original character, the male
character, by refusing it that baptism. This reservoir exists in the
Hive-bee. Do we find a similar organ in the other Hymenoptera,
whether honey-gatherers or hunters? The anatomical treatises are
either silent on this point or, without further enquiry, apply to the
order as a whole the data provided by the Hive-bee, however much she
differs from the mass of Hymenoptera owing to her social habits, her
sterile workers and especially her tremendous fertility, extending
over so long a period.

I at first doubted the universal presence of this spermatic
receptacle, having failed to find it under my scalpel in my former
investigations into the anatomy of the Sphex-wasps and some other
game-hunters. But this organ is so delicate and so small that it very
easily escapes the eye, especially when our attention is not
specially directed in search of it; and, even when we are looking for
it and it only, we do not always succeed in discovering it. We have
to find a globule attaining in many cases hardly as much as a
millimetre (About one-fiftieth of an inch.--Translator's Note.) in
diameter, a globule headed amidst a tangle of air-ducts and fatty
patches, of which it shares the colour, a dull white. Then again, the
merest slip of the forceps is enough to destroy it. My first
investigations, therefore, which concerned the reproductive apparatus
as a whole, might very well have allowed it to pass unperceived.

In order to know the rights of the matter once and for all, as the
anatomical treatises taught me nothing, I once more fixed my
microscope on its stand and rearranged my old dissecting-tank, an
ordinary tumbler with a cork disk covered with black satin. This
time, not without a certain strain on my eyes, which are already
growing tired, I succeeded in finding the said organ in the Bembex-
wasps, the Halicti (Cf. Chapters 12 to 14 of the present volume.--
Translator's Note.), the Carpenter-bees, the Bumble-bees, the
Andrenae (A species of Burrowing Bees.--Translator's Note.) and the
Megachiles. (Or Leaf-cutting Bees. Cf. Chapter 8 of the present
volume.--Translator's Note.) I failed in the case of the Osmiae, the
Chalicodomae and the Anthophorae. Is the organ really absent? Or was
there want of skill on my part? I lean towards want of skill and
admit that all the game-hunting and honey-gathering Hymenoptera
possess a seminal receptacle, which can be recognized by its
contents, a quantity of spiral spermatozoids whirling and twisting on
the slide of the microscope.

This organ once accepted, the German theory becomes applicable to all
the Bees and all the Wasps. When copulating, the female receives the
seminal fluid and holds it stored in her receptacle. From that
moment, the two procreating elements are present in the mother at one
and the same time: the female element, the ovule; and the male
element, the spermatozoid. At the egg-layer's will, the receptacle
bestows a tiny drop of its contents upon the matured ovule, when it
reaches the oviduct, and you have a female egg; or else it withholds
its spermatozoids and you have an egg that remains male, as it was at
first. I readily admit it: the theory is very simple, lucid and
seductive. But is it correct? That is another question.

One might begin by reproaching it with making a singular exception to
one of the most general rules. Which of us, casting his eyes over the
whole zoological progression, would dare to assert that the egg is
originally male and that it becomes female by fertilization? Do not
the two sexes both call for the assistance of the fertilizing
element? If there be one undoubted truth, it is certainly that. We
are, it is true, told very curious things about the Hive-bee. I will
not discuss them: this Bee stands too far outside the ordinary
limits; and then the facts asserted are far from being accepted by
everybody. But the non-social Bees and the predatory insects have
nothing special about their laying. Then why should they escape the
common rule, which requires that every living creature, male as well
as female, should come from a fertilized ovule? In its most solemn
act, that of procreation, life is one and uniform; what it does here
it does there and there and everywhere. What! The sporule of a scrap
of moss requires an antherozoid before it is fit to germinate; and
the ovule of a Scolia, that proud huntress, can dispense with the
equivalent in order to hatch and produce a male? These new-fangled
theories seem to me to have very little value.

One might also bring forward the case of the Three-pronged Osmia, who
distributes the two sexes without any order in the hollow of her
reed. What singular whim is the mother obeying when, without decisive
motive, she opens her seminal phial at haphazard to anoint a female
egg, or else keeps it closed, also at haphazard, to allow a male egg
to pass unfertilized? I could imagine impregnation being given or
withheld for periods of some duration; but I cannot understand
impregnation and non-impregnation following upon each other anyhow,
in any sort of order, or rather with no order it all. The mother has
just fertilized an egg. Why should she refuse to fertilize the next,
when neither the provisions nor the lodgings differ in the smallest
respect from the previous provisions and lodgings? These capricious
alternations, so unreasonable and so exceedingly erratic, are
scarcely appropriate to an act of such importance.

But I promised not to argue and I find myself arguing. My reasoning
is too fine for dull wits. I will pass on and come to the brutal
fact, the real sledge-hammer blow.

Towards the end of the Bee's operations, in the first week of June,
the last acts of the Three-horned Osmia become so exceptionally
interesting that I made her the object of redoubled observation. The
swarm at this time is greatly reduced in numbers. I have still some
thirty laggards, who continue very busy, though their work is in
vain. I see some very conscientiously stopping up the entrance to a
tube or a Snail-shell in which they have laid nothing at all. Others
are closing the home after only building a few partitions, or even
mere attempts at partitions. Some are placing at the back of a new
gallery a pinch of pollen which will benefit nobody and then shutting
up the house with an earthen stopper as thick, as carefully made as
though the safety of a family depended on it. Born a worker, the
Osmia must die working. When her ovaries are exhausted, she spends
the remainder of her strength on useless works: partitions, plugs,
pollen-heaps, all destined to be left unemployed. The little animal
machine cannot bring itself to be inactive even when there is nothing
more to be done. It goes on working so that its last vibrations of
energy may be used up in fruitless labour. I commend these
aberrations to the staunch supporters of reasoning-powers in the
animal.

Before coming to these useless tasks, my laggards have laid their
last eggs, of which I know the exact cells, the exact dates. These
eggs, as far as the microscopes can tell, differ in no respect from
the others, the older ones. They have the same dimensions, the same
shape, the same glossiness, the same look of freshness. Nor are their
provisions in any way peculiar, being very well suited to the males,
who conclude the laying. And yet these last eggs do not hatch: they
wrinkle, fade and wither on the pile of food. In one case, I count
three or four sterile eggs among the last lot laid; in another, I
find two or only one. Elsewhere in the swarm, fertile eggs have been
laid right up to the end.

Those sterile eggs, stricken with death at the moment of their birth,
are too numerous to be ignored. Why do they not hatch like the other
eggs, which outwardly they resemble in every respect? They have
received the same attention from the mother and the same portion of
food. The searching microscope shows me nothing in them to explain
the fatal ending.

To the unprejudiced mind, the answer is obvious. Those eggs do not
hatch because they have not been fertilized. Any animal or vegetable
egg that had not received the life-giving impregnation would perish
in the same way. No other answer is possible. It is no use talking of
the distant period of the laying: eggs of the same period laid by
other mothers, eggs of the same date and likewise the final ones of a
laying, are perfectly fertile. Once more, they do not hatch because
they were not fertilized.

And why were they not fertilized? Because the seminal receptacle, so
tiny, so difficult to see that it sometimes escaped me despite all my
scrutiny, had exhausted its contents. The mothers in whom this
receptacle retained a remnant of sperm to the end had their last eggs
as fertile as the first; the others, whose seminal reservoir was
exhausted too soon, had their last-born stricken with death. All this
seems to me as clear as daylight.

If the unfertilized eggs perish without hatching, those which hatch
and produce males are therefore fertilized; and the German theory
falls to the ground.

Then what explanation shall I give of the wonderful facts which I
have set forth? Why, none, absolutely none. I do not explain facts, I
relate them. Growing daily more sceptical of the interpretations
suggested to me and more hesitating as to those which I may have to
suggest myself, the more I observe and experiment, the more clearly I
see rising out of the black mists of possibility an enormous note of
interrogation.

Dear insects, my study of you has sustained me and continues to
sustain me in my heaviest trials. I must take leave of you for
to-day. The ranks are thinning around me and the long hopes have
fled. Shall I be able to speak to you again? (This is the closing
paragraph of Volume 3 of the "Souvenirs entomologiques," of which the
author has lived to publish seven more volumes, containing over 2,500
pages and nearly 850,000 words.--Translator's Note.)


CHAPTER 6. INSTINCT AND DISCERNMENT.

The Pelopaeus (A Mason-wasp forming the subject of essays which have
not yet been published in English.--Translator's Note.) gives us a
very poor idea of her intellect when she plasters up the spot in the
wall where the nest which I have removed used to stand, when she
persists in cramming her cell with Spiders for the benefit of an egg
no longer there and when she dutifully closes a cell which my forceps
has left empty, extracting alike germ and provisions. The Mason-bees
(Cf. "The Mason-bees": chapter 7.--Translator's Note.), the
caterpillar of the Great Peacock Moth (Cf. "Social Life in the Insect
World" by J.H. Fabre, translated by Bernard Miall: chapter 14.--
Translator's Note.) and many others, when subjected to similar tests,
are guilty of the same illogical behaviour: they continue, in the
normal order, their series of industrious actions, though an accident
has now rendered them all useless. Just like millstones unable to
cease revolving though there be no corn left to grind, let them once
be given the compelling power and they will continue to perform their
task despite its futility. Are they then machines? Far be it from me
to think anything so foolish.

It is impossible to make definite progress on the shifting sands of
contradictory facts: each step in our interpretation may find us
embogged. And yet these facts speak so loudly that I do not hesitate
to translate their evidence as I understand it. In insect mentality,
we have to distinguish two very different domains. One of these is
INSTINCT properly so called, the unconscious impulse that presides
over the most wonderful part of what the creature achieves. Where
experience and imitation are of absolutely no avail, instinct lays
down its inflexible law. It is instinct and instinct alone that makes
the mother build for a family which she will never see; that counsels
the storing of provisions for the unknown offspring; that directs the
sting towards the nerve-centres of the prey and skilfully paralyses
it, so that the game may keep good; that instigates, in fine, a host
of actions wherein shrewd reason and consummate science would have
their part, were the creature acting through discernment.

This faculty is perfect of its kind from the outset, otherwise the
insect would have no posterity. Time adds nothing to it and takes
nothing from it. Such as it was for a definite species, such it is
to-day and such it will remain, perhaps the most settled zoological
characteristic of them all. It is not free nor conscious in its
practice, any more than is the faculty of the stomach for digestion
or that of the heart for pulsation. The phases of its operations are
predetermined, necessarily entailed one by another; they suggest a
system of clock-work wherein one wheel set in motion brings about the
movement of the next. This is the mechanical side of the insect, the
fatum, the only thing which is able to explain the monstrous
illogicality of a Pelopaeus when misled by my artifices. Is the Lamb
when it first grips the teat a free and conscious agent, capable of
improvement in its difficult art of taking nourishment? The insect is
no more capable of improvement in its art, more difficult still, of
giving nourishment.

But, with its hide-bound science ignorant of itself, pure insect, if
it stood alone, would leave the insect unarmed in the perpetual
conflict of circumstances. No two moments in time are identical;
though the background remain the same, the details change; the
unexpected rises on every side. In this bewildering confusion, a
guide is needed to seek, accept, refuse and select; to show
preference for this and indifference to that; to turn to account, in
short, anything useful that occasion may offer. This guide the insect
undoubtedly possesses, to a very manifest degree. It is the second
province of its mentality. Here it is conscious and capable of
improvement by experience. I dare not speak of this rudimentary
faculty as intelligence, which is too exalted a title: I will call it
DISCERNMENT. The insect, in exercising its highest gifts, discerns,
differentiates between one thing and another, within the sphere of
its business, of course; and that is about all.

As long as we confound acts of pure instinct and acts of discernment
under the same head, we shall fall back into those endless
discussions which embitter controversy without bringing us one step
nearer to the solution of the problem. Is the insect conscious of
what it does? Yes and no. No, if its action is in the province of
instinct; yes, if the action is in that of discernment. Are the
habits of an insect capable of modification? No, decidedly not, if
the habit in question belongs to the province of instinct; yes, if it
belongs to that of discernment. Let us state this fundamental
distinction more precisely by the aid of a few examples.

The Pelopaeus builds her cells with earth already softened, with mud.
Here we have instinct, the unalterable characteristic of the worker.
She has always built in this way and always will. The passing ages
will never teach her, neither the struggle for life nor the law of
selection will ever induce her to imitate the Mason-bee and collect
dry dust for her mortar. This mud nest needs a shelter against the
rain. The hiding-place under a stone suffices at first. But should
she find something better, the potter takes possession of that
something better and instals herself in the home of man. (The
Pelopaeus builds in the fire-places of houses.--Translator's Note.)
There we have discernment, the source of some sort of capacity for
improvement.

The Pelopaeus supplies her larvae with provisions in the form of
Spiders. There you have instinct. The climate, the longitude or
latitude, the changing seasons, the abundance or scarcity of game
introduce no modification into this diet, though the larva shows
itself satisfied with other fare provided by myself. Its forebears
were brought up on Spiders; their descendants consumed similar food;
and their posterity again will know no other. Not a single
circumstance, however favourable, will ever persuade the Pelopaeus
that young Crickets, for instance, are as good as Spiders and that
her family would accept them gladly. Instinct binds her down to the
national diet.

But, should the Epeira (The Weaving or Garden Spider. Cf. "The Life
of the Spider" by J. Henri Fabre translated by Alexander Teixeira de
Mattos; chapters 9 to 14 and appendix.--Translator's Note.), the
favourite prey, be lacking, must the Pelopaeus therefore give up
foraging? She will stock her warehouses all the same, because any
Spider suits her. There you have discernment, whose elasticity makes
up, in certain circumstances, for the too-great rigidity of instinct.
Amid the innumerable variety of game, the huntress is able to discern
between what is Spider and what is not; and, in this way, she is
always prepared to supply her family, without quitting the domain of
her instinct.

The Hairy Ammophila gives her larva a single caterpillar, a large
one, paralysed by as many pricks of her sting as it has nervous
centres in its thorax and abdomen. Her surgical skill in subduing the
monster is instinct displayed in a form which makes short work of any
inclination to see in it an acquired habit. In an art that can leave
no one to practise it in the future unless that one be perfect at the
outset, of what avail are happy chances, atavistic tendencies, the
mellowing hand of time? But the grey caterpillar, sacrificed one day,
may be succeeded on another day by a green, yellow or striped
caterpillar. There you have discernment, which is quite capable of
recognizing the regulation prey under very diverse garbs.

The Megachiles build their honey-jars with disks cut out of leaves;
certain Anthidia make felted cotton wallets; others fashion pots out
of resin. There you have instinct. Will any rash mind ever conceive
the singular idea that the Leaf-cutter might very well have started
working in cotton, that the cotton-wool-worker once thought or will
one day think of cutting disks out of the leaves of the lilac- and
the rose-tree, that the resin-kneader began with clay? Who would dare
to indulge in any such theories? Each Bee has her art, her medium, to
which she strictly confines herself. The first has her leaves; the
second her wadding; the third her resin. None of these guilds has
ever changed trades with another; and none ever will. There you have
instinct, keeping the workers to their specialities. There are no
innovations in their workshops, no recipes resulting from experiment,
no ingenious devices, no progress from indifferent to good, from good
to excellent. To-day's method is the facsimile of yesterday's; and
to-morrow will know no other.

But, though the manufacturing-process is invariable, the raw material
is subject to change. The plant that supplies the cotton differs in
species according to the locality; the bush out of whose leaves the
pieces will be cut is not the same in the various fields of
operation; the tree that provides the resinous putty may be a pine, a
cypress, a juniper, a cedar or a spruce, all very different in
appearance. What will guide the insect in its gleaning? Discernment.

These, I think, are sufficient details of the fundamental distinction
to be drawn in the insect's mentality; the distinction, that is,
between instinct and discernment. If people confuse these two
provinces, as they nearly always do, any understanding becomes
impossible; the last glimmer of light disappears behind the clouds of
interminable discussions. From an industrial point of view, let us
look upon the insect as a worker thoroughly versed from birth in a
craft whose essential principles never vary; let us grant that
unconscious worker a gleam of intelligence which will permit it to
extricate itself from the inevitable conflict of attendant
circumstances; and I think that we shall have come as near to the
truth as the state of our knowledge will allow for the moment.

Having thus assigned a due share both to instinct and the aberrations
of instinct when the course of its different phases is disturbed, let
us see what discernment is able to do in the selection of a site for
the nest and materials for building it; and, leaving the Pelopaeus,
upon whom it is useless to dwell any longer, let us consider other
examples, picked from among those richest in variations.

The Mason-bee of the Sheds (Chalicodoma rufitarsis, PEREZ) well
deserves the name which I have felt justified in giving her from her
habits: she settles in numerous colonies in our sheds, on the lower
surface of the tiles, where she builds huge nests which endanger the
solidity of the roof. Nowhere does the insect display a greater zeal
for work than in one of these colossal cities, an estate which is
constantly increasing as it passes down from one generation to
another; nowhere does it find a better workshop for the exercise of
its industry. Here it has plenty of room: a quiet resting-place,
sheltered from damp and from excess of heat or cold.

But the spacious domain under the tiles is not within the reach of
all: sheds with free access and the proper sunny aspect are pretty
rare. These sites fall only to the favoured of fortune. Where will
the others take up their quarters? More or less everywhere. Without
leaving the house in which I live, I can enumerate stone, wood,
glass, metal, paint and mortar as forming the foundation of the
nests. The green-house with its furnace heat in the summer and its
bright light, equalling that outside, is fairly well-frequented. The
Mason-bee hardly ever fails to build there each year, in squads of a
few dozen apiece, now on the glass panes, now on the iron bars of the
framework. Other little swarms settle in the window embrasures, under
the projecting ledge of the front door or in the cranny between the
wall and an open shutter. Others again, being perhaps of a morose
disposition, flee society and prefer to work in solitude, one in the
inside of a lock or of a pipe intended to carry the rain-water from
the leads; another in the mouldings of the doors and windows or in
the crude ornamentation of the stone-work. In short, the house is
made use of all round, provided that the shelter be an out-of-door
one; for observe that the enterprising invader, unlike the Pelopaeus,
never penetrates inside our dwellings. The case of the conservatory
is an exception more apparent than real: the glass building, standing
wide open throughout the summer, is to the Mason-bee but a shed a
little lighter than the others. There is nothing here to arouse the
distrust with which anything indoors or shut up inspires her. To
build on the threshold of an outer door, or to usurp its lock, a
hiding-place to her fancy, is all that she allows herself; to go any
farther is an adventure repugnant to her taste.

Lastly, in the case of all these dwellings, the Mason-bee is man's
free tenant; her industry makes use of the products of our own
industry. Can she have no other establishments? She has, beyond a
doubt; she possesses some constructed on the ancient plan. On a stone
the size of a man's fist, protected by the shelter of a hedge,
sometimes even on a pebble in the open air, I see her building now
groups of cells as large as a walnut, now domes emulating in size,
shape and solidity those of her rival, the Mason-bee of the Walls.

The stone support is the most frequent, though not the only one. I
have found nests, but sparsely inhabited it is true, on the trunks of
trees, in the seams of the rough bark of oaks. Among those whose
support was a living plant, I will mention two that stand out above
all the others. The first was built in the lobe of a torch-thistle as
thick as my leg; the second rested on a stalk of the opuntia, the
Indian fig. Had the fierce armour of these two stout cactuses
attracted the attention of the insect, which looked upon their tufts
of spikes as furnishing a system of defence for its nest? Perhaps so.
In any case, the attempt was not imitated; I never saw another
installation of the kind. There is one definite conclusion to be
drawn from my two discoveries. Despite the oddity of their structure,
which is unparalleled among the local flora, the two American
importations did not compel the insect to go through an
apprenticeship of groping and hesitation. The one which found itself
in the presence of those novel growths, and which was perhaps the
first of its race to do so, took possession of their lobes and stalks
just as it would have done of a familiar site. From the start, the
fleshy plants from the New World suited it as well as the trunk of a
native tree.

The Mason-bee of the Pebbles (Chalicodoma parietina) has none of this
elasticity in the choice of a site. In her case, the smooth stone of
the parched uplands is the almost invariable foundation of her
structures. Elsewhere, under a less clement sky, she prefers the
support of a wall, which protects the nest against the prolonged
snows. Lastly, the Mason-bee of the Shrubs (Chalicodoma rufescens,
PEREZ) fixes her ball of clay to a twig of any ligneous plant, from
the thyme, the rock-rose and the heath to the oak, the elm and the
pine. The list of the sites that suit her would almost form a
complete catalogue of the ligneous flora.

The variety of places wherein the insect instals itself, so eloquent
of the part played by discernment in their selection, becomes still
more remarkable when it is accompanied by a corresponding variety in
the architecture of the cells. This is more particularly the case
with the Three-horned Osmia, who, as she uses clayey materials very
easily affected by the rain, requires, like the Pelopaeus, a dry
shelter for her cells, a shelter which she finds ready-made and uses
just as it is, after a few touches by way of sweeping and cleansing.
The homes which I see her adopt are especially the shells of Snails
that have died under the stone-heaps and in the low, unmortared walls
which support the cultivated earth of the hills in shelves or
terraces. The use of Snail-shells is accompanied by the no less
active use of the old cells of both the Mason-bee of the Sheds and of
certain Anthophorae (A. pilipes, A. parietina and A. personata).

We must not forget the reed, which is highly appreciated when--a rare
find--it appears under the requisite conditions. In its natural
state, the plant with the mighty hollow cylinders is of no possible
use to the Osmia, who knows nothing of the art of perforating a woody
wall. The gallery of an internode has to be wide open before the
insect can take possession of it. Also, the clean-cut stump must be
horizontal, otherwise the rain would soften the fragile edifice of
clay and soon lay it low; also, the stump must not be lying on the
ground and must be kept at some distance from the dampness of the
soil. We see therefore that, without the intervention of man,
involuntary in the vast majority of cases and deliberate only on the
experimenter's part, the Osmia would hardly ever find a reed-stump
suited to the installation of her family. It is to her a casual
acquisition, a home unknown to her race before men took it into their
heads to cut reeds and make them into hurdles for drying figs in the
sun.

How did the work of man's pruning-knife bring about the abandonment
of the natural lodging? How was the spiral staircase of the Snail-
shell replaced by the cylindrical gallery of the reed? Was the change
from one kind of house to another effected by gradual transitions, by
attempts made, abandoned, resumed, becoming more and more definite in
their results as generation succeeded generation? Or did the Osmia,
finding the cut reed that answered her requirements, instal herself
there straightway, scorning her ancient dwelling, the Snail-shell?
These questions called for a reply; and they have received one. Let
us describe how things happened.

Near Serignan are some great quarries of coarse limestone,
characteristic of the miocene formation of the Rhone valley. These
have been worked for many generations. The ancient public buildings
of Orange, notably the colossal frontage of the theatre whither all
the intellectual world once flocked to hear Sophocles' "Oedipus
Tyrannus," derive most of their material from these quarries. Other
evidence confirms what the similarity of the hewn stone tells us.
Among the rubbish that fills up the spaces between the tiers of
seats, they occasionally discover the Marseilles obol, a bit of
silver stamped with the four-spoked wheel, or a few bronze coins
bearing the effigy of Augustus or Tiberius. Scattered also here and
there among the monuments of antiquity are heaps of refuse,
accumulations of broken stones in which various Hymenoptera,
including the Three-horned Osmia in particular, take possession of
the dead Snail-shell.

The quarries form part of an extensive plateau which is so arid as to
be nearly deserted. In these conditions, the Osmia, at all times
faithful to her birth-place, has little or no need to emigrate from
her heap of stones and leave the shell for another dwelling which she
would have to go and seek at a distance. Since there are heaps of
stone there, she probably has no other dwelling than the Snail-shell.
Nothing tells us that the present-day generations are not descended
in the direct line from the generations contemporary with the
quarryman who lost his as or his obol at this spot. All the
circumstances seem to point to it: the Osmia of the quarries is an
inveterate user of Snail-shells; so far as heredity is concerned, she
knows nothing whatever of reeds. Well, we must place her in the
presence of these new lodgings.

I collect during the winter about two dozen well-stocked Snail-shells
and instal them in a quiet corner of my study, as I did at the time
of my enquiries into the distribution of the sexes. The little hive
with its front pierced with forty holes has bits of reed fitted to
it. At the foot of the five rows of cylinders I place the inhabited
shells and with these I mix a few small stones, the better to imitate
the natural conditions. I add an assortment of empty Snail-shells,
after carefully cleaning the interior so as to make the Osmia's stay
more pleasant. When the time comes for nest-building, the stay-at-
home insect will have, close beside the house of its birth, a choice
of two habitations: the cylinder, a novelty unknown to its race; and
the spiral staircase, the ancient ancestral home.

The nests were finished at the end of May and the Osmiae began to
answer my list of questions. Some, the great majority, settled
exclusively in the reeds; the others remained faithful to the Snail-
shell or else entrusted their eggs partly to the spirals and partly
to the cylinders. With the first, who were the pioneers of
cylindrical architecture, there was no hesitation that I could
perceive: after exploring the stump of reed for a time and
recognizing it as serviceable, the insect instals itself there and,
an expert from the first touch, without apprenticeship, without
groping, without any tendencies bequeathed by the long practice of
its predecessors, builds its straight row of cells on a very
different plan from that demanded by the spiral cavity of the shell
which increases in size as it goes on.

The slow school of the ages, the gradual acquisitions of the past,
the legacies of heredity count for nothing therefore in the Osmia's
education. Without any novitiate on its own part or that of its
forebears, the insect is versed straight away in the calling which it
has to pursue; it possesses, inseparable from its nature, the
qualities demanded by its craft: some which are invariable and belong
to the domain of instinct; others, flexible, belonging to the
province of discernment. To divide a free lodging into chambers by
means of mud partitions; to fill those chambers with a heap of
pollen-flour, with a few sups of honey in the central part where the
egg is to lie; in short, to prepare board and lodging for the
unknown, for a family which the mothers have never seen in the past
and will never see in the future: this, in its essential features, is
the function of the Osmia's instinct. Here, everything is
harmoniously, inflexibly, permanently preordained; the insect has but
to follow its blind impulse to attain the goal. But the free lodging
offered by chance varies exceedingly in hygienic conditions, in shape
and in capacity. Instinct, which does not choose, which does not
contrive, would, if it were alone, leave the insect's existence in
peril. To help her out of her predicament, in these complex
circumstances, the Osmia possesses her little stock of discernment,
which distinguishes between the dry and the wet, the solid and the
fragile, the sheltered and the exposed; which recognizes the worth or
the worthlessness of a site and knows how to sprinkle it with cells
according to the size and shape of the space at disposal. Here,
slight industrial variations are necessary and inevitable; and the
insect excels in them without any apprenticeship, as the experiment
with the native Osmia of the quarries has just proved.

Animal resources have a certain elasticity, within narrow limits.
What we learn from the animals' industry at a given moment is not
always the full measure of their skill. They possess latent powers
held in reserve for certain emergencies. Long generations can succeed
one another without employing them; but, should some circumstance
require it, suddenly those powers burst forth, free of any previous
attempts, even as the spark potentially contained in the flint
flashes forth independently of all preceding gleams. Could one who
knew nothing of the Sparrow but her nest under the eaves suspect the
ball-shaped nest at the top of a tree? Would one who knew nothing of
the Osmia save her home in the Snail-shell expect to see her accept
as her dwelling a stump of reed, a paper funnel, a glass tube? My
neighbour the Sparrow, impulsively taking it into her head to leave
the roof for the plane-tree, the Osmia of the quarries, rejecting her
natal cabin, the spiral of the shell, for my cylinder, alike show us
how sudden and spontaneous are the industrial variations of animals.


CHAPTER 7. ECONOMY OF ENERGY.

What stimulus does the insect obey when it employs the reserve powers
that slumber in its race? Of what use are its industrial variations?
The Osmia will yield us her secret with no great difficulty. Let us
examine her work in a cylindrical habitation. I have described in
full detail, in the foregoing pages, the structure of her nests when
the dwelling adopted is a reed-stump or any other cylinder; and I
will content myself here with recapitulating the essential features
of that nest-building.

We must first distinguish three classes of reeds according to their
diameter: the small, the medium-sized and the large. I call small
those whose narrow width just allows the Osmia to go about her
household duties without discomfort. She must be able to turn where
she stands in order to brush her abdomen and rub off its load of
pollen, after disgorging the honey in the centre of the heap of flour
already collected. If the width of the tube does not admit of this
operation, if the insect is obliged to go out and then come in again
backwards in order to place itself in a favourable posture for the
discharge of the pollen, then the reed is too narrow and the Osmia is
rather reluctant to accept it. The middle-sized reeds and a fortiori
the large ones leave the victualler entire liberty of action; but the
former do not exceed the width of a cell, a width agreeing with the
bulk of the future cocoon, whereas the latter, with their excessive
diameter, require more than one chamber on the same floor.

When free to choose, the Osmia settles by preference in the small
reeds. Here, the work of building is reduced to its simplest
expression and consists in dividing the tube by means of earthen
partitions into a straight row of cells. Against the partition
forming the back wall of the preceding cell the mother places first a
heap of honey and pollen; next, when the portion is seen to be
enough, she lays an egg in the centre of it. Then and then only she
resumes her plasterer's work and marks out the length of the new cell
with a mud partition. This partition in its turn serves as the rear-
wall of another chamber, which is first victualled and then closed;
and so on until the cylinder is sufficiently colonized and receives a
thick terminal stopper at its orifice. In a word, the chief
characteristic of this method of nest-building, the roughest of all,
is that the partition in front is not undertaken so long as the
victualling is still incomplete, or, in other words, that the
provisions and the egg are deposited before the Bee sets to work on
the partition.

At first sight, this latter detail hardly deserves attention: is it
not right to fill the pot before we put a lid on? The Osmia who owns
a medium-sized reed is not at all of this opinion; and other
plasterers share her views, as we shall see when we watch the
Odynerus building her nest. (A genus of Mason-wasps, the essays on
which have not yet been translated into English.--Translator's Note.)
Here we have an excellent illustration of one of those latent powers
held in reserve for exceptional occasions and suddenly brought into
play, although often very far removed from the insect's regular
methods. If the reed, without being of inordinate width from the
point of view of the cocoon, is nevertheless too spacious to afford
the Bee a suitable purchase against the wall at the moment when she
is disgorging honey and brushing off her load of pollen; the Osmia
altogether changes the order of her work; she sets up the partition
first and then does the victualling.

All round the inside of the tube she places a ring of mud, which, as
the result of her constant visits to the mortar, ends by becoming a
complete diaphragm minus an orifice at the side, a sort of round dog-
hole, just large enough for the insect to pass through. When the cell
is thus marked out and almost wholly closed, the Osmia attends to the
storing of her provisions and the laying of her eggs. Steadying
herself against the margin of the hole at one time with her fore-legs
and at another with her hind-legs, she is able to empty her crop and
to brush her abdomen; by pressing against it, she obtains a foothold
for her little efforts in these various operations. When the tube was
narrow, the outer wall supplied this foothold and the earthen
partition was postponed until the heap of provisions was completed
and surmounted by the egg; but in the present case the passage is too
wide and would leave the insect floundering helplessly in space, so
the partition with its serving-hatch takes precedence of the
victuals. This method is a little more expensive than the other,
first in materials, because of the diameter of the reed, and secondly
in time, if only because of the dog-hole, a delicate piece of mortar-
work which is too soft at first and cannot be used until it has dried
and become harder. Therefore the Osmia, who is sparing of her time
and strength, accepts medium-sized reeds only when there are no small
ones available.

The large tubes she will use only in grave emergencies and I am
unable to state exactly what these exceptional circumstances are.
Perhaps she decides to make use of those roomy dwellings when the
eggs have to be laid at once and there is no other shelter in the
neighbourhood. While my cylinder-hives gave me plenty of well-filled
reeds of the first and second class, they provided me with but half-
a-dozen at most of the third, notwithstanding my precaution to
furnish the apparatus with a varied assortment.

The Osmia's repugnance to big cylinders is quite justified. The work
in fact is longer and more costly when the tubes are wide. An
inspection of a nest constructed under these conditions is enough to
convince us. It now consists not of a string of chambers obtained by
simple transverse partitions, but of a confused heap of clumsy, many-
sided compartments, standing back to back, with a tendency to group
themselves in storeys without succeeding in doing so, because any
regular arrangement would mean that the ceilings possessed a span
which it is not in the builder's power to achieve. The edifice is not
a geometrical masterpiece and it is even less satisfactory from the
point of view of economy. In the previous constructions, the sides of
the reed supplied the greater part of the walls and the work was
limited to one partition for each cell. Here, except at the actual
periphery, where the tube itself supplies a foundation, everything
has to be obtained by sheer building: the floor, the ceiling, the
walls of the many-sided compartment are one and all made of mortar.
The structure is almost as costly in materials as that of the
Chalicodoma or the Pelopaeus.

It must be pretty difficult, too, when one thinks of its
irregularity. Fitting as best she can the projecting angles of the
new cell into the recessed corners of the cell already built, the
Osmia runs up walls more or less curved, upright or slanting, which
intersect one another at various points, so that each compartment
requires a new and complicated plan of construction, which is very
different from the circular-partition style of architecture, with its
row of parallel dividing-disks. Moreover, in this composite
arrangement, the size of the recesses left available by the earlier
work to some extent decides the assessment of the sexes, for,
according to the dimensions of those recesses, the walls erected take
in now a larger space, the home of a female, and now a smaller space,
the home of a male. Roomy quarters therefore have a double drawback
for the Osmia: they greatly increase the outlay in materials; and
also they establish in the lower layers, among the females, males
who, because of their earlier hatching, would be much better placed
near the mouth of the nest. I am convinced of it: if the Osmia
refuses big reeds and accepts them only in the last resort, when
there are no others, it is because she objects to additional labour
and to the mixture of the sexes.

The Snail-shell, then, is but an indifferent home for her, which she
is quite ready to abandon should a better offer. Its expanding cavity
represents an average between the favourite small cylinder and the
unpopular large cylinder, which is accepted only when there is no
other obtainable. The first whorls of the spiral are too narrow to be
of use to the Osmia, but the middle ones have the right diameter for
cocoons arranged in single file. Here things happen as in a first-
class reed, for the helical curve in no way affects the method of
structure employed for a rectilinear series of cells. Circular
partitions are erected at the required distances, with or without a
serving-hatch, according to the diameter. These mark out the first
cells, one after the other, which are reserved solely for the
females. Then comes the last whorl, which is much too wide for a
single row of cells; and here we once more find, exactly as in a wide
reed, a costly profusion of masonry, an irregular arrangement of the
cells and a mixture of the sexes.

Having said so much, let us go back to the Osmia of the quarries.
Why, when I offer them simultaneously Snail-shells and reeds of a
suitable size, do the old frequenters of the shells prefer the reeds,
which in all probability have never before been utilized by their
race? Most of them scorn the ancestral dwelling and enthusiastically
accept my reeds. Some, it is true, take up their quarters in the
Snail-shell; but even among these a goodly number refuse my new
shells and return to their birth-place, the old Snail-shell, in order
to utilize the family property, without much labour, at the cost of a
few repairs. Whence, I ask, comes this general preference for the
cylinder, never used hitherto? The answer can be only this: of two
lodgings at her disposal the Osmia selects the one that provides a
comfortable home at a minimum outlay. She economizes her strength
when restoring an old nest; she economizes it when replacing the
Snail-shell by the reed.

Can animal industry, like our own, obey the law of economy, the
sovran law that governs our industrial machine even as it governs, at
least to all appearances, the sublime machine of the universe? Let us
go deeper into the question and bring other workers into evidence,
those especially who, better equipped perhaps and at any rate better
fitted for hard work, attack the difficulties of their trade boldly
and look down upon alien establishments with scorn. Of this number
are the Chalicodomae, the Mason-bees proper.

The Mason-bee of the Pebbles does not make up her mind to build a
brand-new dome unless there be a dearth of old and not quite
dilapidated nests. The mothers, sisters apparently and heirs-at-law
to the domain, dispute fiercely for the ancestral abode. The first
who, by sheer brute force, takes possession of the dome, perches upon
it and, for long hours, watches events while polishing her wings. If
some claimant puts in an appearance, forthwith the other turns her
out with a volley of blows. In this way the old nests are employed so
long as they have not become uninhabitable hovels.

Without being equally jealous of the maternal inheritance, the Mason-
bee of the Sheds eagerly uses the cells whence her generation issued.
The work in the huge city under the eaves begins thus: the old cells,
of which, by the way, the good-natured owner yields a portion to
Latreille's Osmia and to the Three-horned Osmia alike, are first made
clean and wholesome and cleared of broken plaster and then
provisioned and shut. When all the accessible chambers are occupied,
the actual building begins with a new stratum of cells upon the
former edifice, which becomes more and more massive from year to
year.

The Mason-bee of the Shrubs, with her spherical nests hardly larger
than walnuts, puzzled me at first. Does she use the old buildings or
does she abandon them for good? To-day perplexity makes way for
certainty: she uses them very readily. I have several times surprised
her lodging her family in the empty rooms of a nest where she was
doubtless born herself. Like her kinswoman of the Pebbles, she
returns to the native dwelling and fights for its possession. Also,
like the dome-builder, she is an anchorite and prefers to cultivate
the lean inheritance alone. Sometimes, however, the nest is of
exceptional size and harbours a crowd of occupants, who live in
peace, each attending to her business, as in the colossal hives in
the sheds. Should the colony be at all numerous and the estate
descend to two or three generations in succession, with a fresh layer
of masonry each year, the normal walnut-sized nest becomes a ball as
large as a man's two fists. I have gathered on a pine-tree a nest of
the Mason-bee of the Shrubs that weighed a kilogram (2.205 pounds
avoirdupois.--Translator's Note.) and was the size of a child's head.
A twig hardly thicker than a straw served as its support. The casual
sight of that lump swinging over the spot on which I had sat down
made me think of the mishap that befell Garo. (The hero of La
Fontaine's fable, "Le Gland et la Citrouille," who wondered why
acorns grew on such tall trees and pumpkins on such low vines, until
he fell asleep under one of the latter and a pumpkin dropped upon his
nose.--Translator's Note.) If such nests were plentiful in the trees,
any one seeking the shade would run a serious risk of having his head
smashed.

After the Masons, the Carpenters. Among the guild of wood-workers,
the most powerful is the Carpenter-bee (Xylocopa violacea (Cf. "The
Life of the Spider": chapter 1.--Translator's Note.)), a very large
Bee of formidable appearance, clad in black velvet with violet-
coloured wings. The mother gives her larvae as a dwelling a
cylindrical gallery which she digs in rotten wood. Useless timber
lying exposed to the air, vine-poles, large logs of fire-wood
seasoning out of doors, heaped up in front of the farmhouse porch,
stumps of trees, vine-stocks and big branches of all kinds are her
favourite building-yards. A solitary and industrious worker, she
bores, bit by bit, circular passages the width of one's thumb, as
clear-cut as though they were made with an auger. A heap of saw-dust
accumulates on the ground and bears witness to the severity of the
task. Usually, the same aperture is the entrance to two or three
parallel corridors. With several galleries there is accommodation for
the entire laying, though each gallery is quite short; and the Bee
thus avoids those long series which always create difficulties when
the moment of hatching arrives. The laggards and the insects eager to
emerge are less likely to get in each other's way.

After obtaining the dwelling, the Carpenter-bee behaves like the
Osmia who is in possession of a reed. Provisions are collected, the
egg is laid and the chamber is walled in front with a saw-dust
partition. The work is pursued in this way until the two or three
passages composing the house are completely stocked. Heaping up
provisions and erecting partitions are an invariable feature of the
Xylocopa's programme; no circumstance can release the mother from the
duty of providing for the future of her family, in the matter both of
ready-prepared food and of separate compartments for the rearing of
each larva. It is only in the boring of the galleries, the most
laborious part of the work, that economy can occasionally be
exercised by a piece of luck. Well, is the powerful Carpenter, all
unheeding of fatigue, able to take advantage of such fortunate
occasions? Does she know how to make use of houses which she has not
tunnelled herself? Why, yes: a free lodging suits her just as much as
it does the various Mason-bees. She knows as well as they the
economic advantages of an old nest that is still in good condition:
she settles down, as far as possible, in her predecessors' galleries,
after freshening up the sides with a superficial scraping. And she
does better still. She readily accepts lodgings which have never
known a drill, no matter whose. The stout reeds used in the trellis-
work that supports the vines are valuable discoveries, providing as
they do sumptuous galleries free of cost. No preliminary work or next
to none is required with these. Indeed, the insect does not even
trouble to make a side-opening, which would enable it to occupy the
cavity contained within two nodes; it prefers the opening at the end
cut by man's pruning-knife. If the next partition be too near to give
a chamber of sufficient length, the Xylocopa destroys it, which is
easy work, not to be compared with the labour of cutting an entrance
through the side. In this way, a spacious gallery, following on the
short vestibule made by the pruning-knife, is obtained with the least
possible expenditure of energy.

Guided by what was happening on the trellises, I offered the black
Bee the hospitality of my reed-hives. From the very beginning, the
insect gladly welcomed my advances; each spring, I see it inspect my
rows of cylinders, pick out the best ones and instal itself there.
Its work, reduced to a minimum by my intervention, is limited to the
partitions, the materials for which are obtained by scraping the
inner sides of the reed.

As first-rate joiners, next to the Carpenter-bees come the Lithurgi,
of whom my district possesses two species: L. cornutus, FAB., and L.
chrysurus, BOY. By what aberration of nomenclature was the name of
Lithurgus, a worker in stone, given to insects which work solely in
wood? I have caught the first, the stronger of the two, digging
galleries in a large block of oak that served as an arch for a
stable-door; I have always found the second, who is more widely
distributed, settling in dead wood--mulberry, cherry, almond, poplar-
-that was still standing. Her work is exactly the same as the
Xylocopa's, on a smaller scale. A single entrance-hole gives access
to three or four parallel galleries, assembled in a serried group;
and these galleries are subdivided into cells by means of saw-dust
partitions. Following the example of the big Carpenter-bee, Lithurgus
chrysurus knows how to avoid the laborious work of boring, when
occasion offers: I find her cocoons lodged almost as often in old
dormitories as in new ones. She too has the tendency to economize her
strength by turning the work of her predecessors to account. I do not
despair of seeing her adopt the reed if, one day, when I possess a
large enough colony, I decide to try this experiment on her. I will
say nothing about L. cornutus, whom I only once surprised at her
carpentering.

The Anthophorae, those children of the precipitous earthy banks, show
the same thrifty spirit as the other members of the mining
corporation. Three species, A. parietina, A. personata and A.
pilipes, dig long corridors leading to the cells, which are scattered
here and there and one by one. These passages remain open at all
seasons of the year. When spring comes, the new colony uses them just
as they are, provided that they are well preserved in the clayey mass
baked by the sun; it increases their length if necessary, runs out a
few more branches, but does not decide to start boring in new ground
until the old city, which, with its many labyrinths, resembles some
monstrous sponge, is too much undermined for safety. The oval niches,
the cells that open on those corridors, are also profitably employed.
The Anthophora restores their entrance, which has been destroyed by
the insect's recent emergence; she smooths their walls with a fresh
coat of whitewash, after which the lodging is fit to receive the heap
of honey and the egg. When the old cells, insufficient in number and
moreover partly inhabited by diverse intruders, are all occupied, the
boring of new cells begins, in the extended sections of the
galleries, and the rest of the eggs are housed. In this way, the
swarm is settled at a minimum of expense.

To conclude this brief account, let us change the zoological setting
and, as we have already spoken of the Sparrow, see what he can do as
a builder. The simplest form of his nest is the great round ball of
straw, dead leaves and feathers, in the fork of a few branches. It is
costly in material, but can be set up anywhere, when the hole in the
wall or the shelter of a tile are lacking. What reasons induced him
to give up the spherical edifice? To all seeming, the same reasons
that led the Osmia to abandon the Snail-shell's spiral, which
requires a fatiguing expenditure of clay, in favour of the economical
cylinder of the reed. By making his home in a hole in the wall, the
Sparrow escapes the greater part of his work. Here, the dome that
serves as a protection from the rain and the thick walls that offer
resistance to the wind both become superfluous. A mere mattress is
sufficient; the cavity in the wall provides the rest. The saving is
great; and the Sparrow appreciates it quite as much as the Osmia.

This does not mean that the primitive art has disappeared, lost
through neglect; it remains an ineffaceable characteristic of the
species, ever ready to declare itself should circumstances demand it.
The generations of to-day are as much endowed with it as the
generations of yore; without apprenticeship, without the example of
others, they have within themselves, in the potential state, the
industrial aptitude of their ancestors. If aroused by the stimulus of
necessity, this aptitude will pass suddenly from inaction to action.
When, therefore, the Sparrow still from time to time indulges in
spherical building, this is not progress on his part, as is sometimes
contended; it is, on the contrary, a retrogression, a return to the
ancient customs, so prodigal of labour. He is behaving like the Osmia
who, in default of a reed, makes shift with a Snail-shell, which is
more difficult to utilize but easier to find. The cylinder and the
hole in the wall stand for progress; the spiral of the Snail-shell
and the ball-shaped nest represent the starting-point.

I have, I think, sufficiently illustrated the inference which is
borne out by the whole mass of analogous facts. Animal industry
manifests a tendency to achieve the essential with a minimum of
expenditure; after its own fashion, the insect bears witness to the
economy of energy. On the one hand, instinct imposes upon it a craft
that is unchangeable in its fundamental features; on the other hand,
it is left a certain latitude in the details, so as to take advantage
of favourable circumstances and attain the object aimed at with the
least possible expenditure of time, materials and work, the three
elements of mechanical labour. The problem in higher geometry solved
by the Hive-bee is only a particular case--true, a magnificent case,-
-of this general law of economy which seems to govern the whole
animal world. The wax cells, with their maximum capacity as against a
minimum wall-space, are the equivalent, with the superaddition of a
marvellous scientific skill, of the Osmia's compartments in which the
stonework is reduced to a minimum through the selection of a reed.
The artificer in mud and the artificer in wax obey the same tendency:
they economize. Do they know what they are doing? Who would venture
to suggest it in the case of the Bee grappling with her
transcendental problem? The others, pursuing their rustic art, are no
wiser. With all of them, there is no calculation, no premeditation,
but simply blind obedience to the law of general harmony.


CHAPTER 8. THE LEAF-CUTTERS.

It is not enough that animal industry should be able, to a certain
extent, to adapt itself to casual exigencies when choosing the site
of a nest; if the race is to thrive, something else is required,
something which hide-bound instinct is unable to provide. The
Chaffinch, for instance, introduces a great quantity of lichen into
the outer layer of his nest. This is his method of strengthening the
edifice and making a stout framework in which to place first the
bottom mattress of moss, fine straw and rootlets and then the soft
bed of feathers, wool and down. But, should the time-honoured lichen
be lacking, will the bird refrain from building its nest? Will it
forgo the delight of hatching its brood because it has not the
wherewithal to settle its family in the orthodox fashion?

No, the chaffinch is not perplexed by so small a matter; he is an
expert in materials, he understands botanical equivalents. In the
absence of the branches of the evernias, he picks the long beards of
the usneas, the wartlike rosettes of the parmelias, the membranes of
the stictises torn away in shreds; if he can find nothing better, he
makes shift with the bushy tufts of the cladonias. As a practical
lichenologist, when one species is rare or lacking in the
neighbourhood, he is able to fall back on others, varying greatly in
shape, colour and texture. And, if the impossible happened and lichen
failed entirely, I credit the Chaffinch with sufficient talent to be
able to dispense with it and to build the foundations of his nest
with some coarse moss or other.

What the worker in lichens tells us the other weavers of textile
materials confirm. Each has his favourite flora, which hardly ever
varies when the plant is easily accessible and which can be
supplemented by plenty of others when it is not. The bird's botany
would be worth examining; it would be interesting to draw up the
industrial herbal of each species. In this connection, I will quote
just one instance, so as not to stray too far from the subject in
hand.

The Red-backed Shrike (Lanius collurio), the commonest variety in my
district, is noteworthy because of his savage mania for forked
gibbets, the thorns in the hedgerows whereon he impales the
voluminous contents of his game-bag--little half-fledged birds, small
Lizards, Grasshoppers, caterpillars, Beetles--and leaves them to get
high. To this passion for the gallows, which has passed unnoticed by
the country-folk, at least in my part, he adds another, an innocent
botanical passion, which is so much in evidence that everybody, down
to the youngest bird's-nester, knows all about it. His nest, a
massive structure, is made of hardly any other materials than a
greyish and very fluffy plant, which is found everywhere among the
corn. This is the Filago spathulata of the botanists; and the bird
also makes use, though less frequently, of the Filago germanica, or
common cotton-rose. Both are known in Provencal by the name herbo dou
tarnagas, or Shrike-herb. This popular designation tells us plainly
how faithful the bird is to its plant. To have struck the
agricultural labourer, a very indifferent observer, the Shrike's
choice of materials must be remarkably persistent.

Have we here a taste that is exclusive? Not in the least. Though
cotton-roses of all species are plentiful on level ground, they
become scarce and impossible to find on the parched hills. The bird,
on its side, is not given to journeys of exploration and takes what
it finds to suit it in the neighbourhood of its tree or hedge. But on
arid ground, the Micropus erectus, or upright micropus, abounds and
is a satisfactory substitute for the Filago so far as its tiny,
cottony leaves and its little fluffy balls of flowers are concerned.
True, it is short and does not lend itself well to weaver's work. A
few long sprigs of another cottony plant, the Helichrysum staechas,
or wild everlasting, inserted here and there, will give body to the
structure. Thus does the Shrike manage when hard up for his favourite
materials: keeping to the same botanical family, he is able to find
and employ substitutes among the fine cotton-clad stalks.

He is even able to leave the family of the Compositae and to go
gleaning more or less everywhere. Here is the result of my
botanizings at the expense of his nests. We must distinguish between
two genera in the Shrike's rough classification: the cottony plants
and the smooth plants. Among the first, my notes mention the
following: Convolvulus cantabrica, or flax-leaved bindweed; Lotus
symmetricus, or bird's-foot trefoil; Teucrium polium, or poly; and
the flowery heads of the Phragmites communis, or common reed. Among
the second are these: Medicago lupulina, or nonesuch; Trifolium
repens, or white clover; Lathyrus pratensis, or meadow lathyrus;
Capsella bursa pastoris, or shepherd's purse; Vicia peregrina, or
broad-podded vetch; Convolvulus arvensis, or small bindweed;
Pterotheca nemausensis, a sort of hawkweed; and Poa pratensis, or
smooth-stalked meadow-grass. When it is downy, the plant forms almost
the whole nest, as is the case with the flax-leaved bindweed; when
smooth, it forms only the framework, destined to support a crumbling
mass of micropus, as is the case with the small bindweed. When making
this collection, which I am far from giving as the birds' complete
herbarium, I was struck by a wholly unexpected detail: of the various
plants, I found only the heads still in bud; moreover, all the
sprigs, though dry, possessed the green colouring of the growing
plant, a sign of swift desiccation in the sun. Save in a few cases,
therefore, the Shrike does not collect the dead and withered remains:
it is from the growing plants that he reaps his harvest, mowing them
down with his beak and leaving the sheaves to dry in the sun before
using them. I caught him one day hopping about and pecking at the
twigs of a Biscayan bindweed. He was getting in his hay, strewing the
ground with it.

The evidence of the Shrike, confirmed by that of all the other
workers--weavers, basket-makers or woodcutters--whom we may care to
call as witnesses, shows us what a large part must be assigned to
discernment in the bird's choice of materials for its nest. Is the
insect as highly gifted? When it works with vegetable matter, is it
exclusive in its tastes? Does it know only one definite plant, its
special province? Or has it, for employment in its manufactures, a
varied flora, in which its discernment exercises a free choice? For
answers to these questions we may look, above all, to the Leaf-
cutting Bees, the Megachiles. Reaumur has told the story of their
industry in detail; and I refer the reader who wishes for further
particulars to the master's Memoirs.

The man who knows how to use his eyes in his garden will observe,
some day or other, a number of curious holes in the leaves of his
lilac- and rose-trees, some of them round, some oval, as if idle but
skilful hands had been at work with the pinking-iron. In some places,
there is scarcely anything but the veins of the leaves left. The
author of the mischief is a grey-clad Bee, a Megachile. For scissors,
she has her mandibles; for compasses, producing now an oval and anon
a circle, she has her eye and the pivot of her body. The pieces cut
out are made into thimble-shaped wallets, destined to contain the
honey and the egg: the larger, oval pieces supply the floor and
sides; the smaller, round pieces are reserved for the lid. A row of
these thimbles, placed one on top of the other, up to a dozen or
more, though often there are less: that is, roughly, the structure of
the Leaf-cutter's nest.

When taken out of the recess in which the mother has manufactured it,
the cylinder of cells seems to be an indivisible whole, a sort of
tunnel obtained by lining with leaves some gallery dug underground.
The real thing does not correspond with its appearance: under the
least pressure of the fingers, the cylinder breaks up into equal
sections, which are so many compartments independent of their
neighbours as regards both floor and lid. This spontaneous break up
shows us how the work is done. The method agrees with those adopted
by the other Bees. Instead of a general scabbard of leaves,
afterwards subdivided into compartments by transverse partitions, the
Megachile constructs a string of separate wallets, each of which is
finished before the next is begun.

A structure of this sort needs a sheath to keep the pieces in place
while giving them the proper shape. The bag of leaves, in fact, as
turned out by the worker, lacks stability; its numerous pieces, not
glued together, but simply placed one after the other, come apart and
give way as soon as they lose the support of the tunnel that keeps
them united. Later, when it spins its cocoon, the larva infuses a
little of its fluid silk into the gaps and solders the pieces to one
another, especially the inner ones, so much so that the insecure bag
in due course becomes a solid casket whose component parts it is no
longer possible to separate entirely.

The protective sheath, which is also a framework, is not the work of
the mother. Like the great majority of the Osmiae, the Megachiles do
not understand the art of making themselves a home straight away:
they want a borrowed lodging, which may vary considerably in
character. The deserted galleries of the Anthophorae, the burrows of
the fat Earth-worms, the tunnels bored in the trunks of trees by the
larva of the Cerambyx-beetle (The Capricorn, the essay on which has
not yet been published in English.--Translator's Note.), the ruined
dwellings of the Mason-bee of the Pebbles, the Snail-shell nests of
the Three-horned Osmia, reed-stumps, when these are handy, and
crevices in the walls are all so many homes for the Leaf-cutters, who
choose this or that establishment according to the tastes of their
particular genus.

For the sake of clearness, let us cease generalizing and direct our
attention to a definite species. I first selected the White-girdled
Leaf-cutter (Megachile albocincta, PEREZ), not on account of any
exceptional peculiarities, but solely because this is the Bee most
often mentioned in my notes. Her customary dwelling is the tunnel of
an Earth-worm opening on some clay bank. Whether perpendicular or
slanting, this tunnel runs down to an indefinite depth, where the
climate would be too damp for the Bee. Besides, when the time comes
for the hatching of the adult insect, its emergence would be fraught
with peril if it had to climb up from a deep pit through crumbling
rubbish. The Leaf-cutter, therefore, uses only the front portion of
the Worm's gallery, two decimetres at most. (7.8 inches.--
Translator's Note.) What is to be done with the rest of the tunnel?
It is an ascending shaft, tempting to an enemy; and some underground
ravager might come this way and destroy the nest by attacking the row
of cells at the back.

The danger is foreseen. Before fashioning her first honey-bag, the
Bee blocks the passage with a strong barricade composed of the only
materials used in the Leaf-cutter's guild. Fragments of leaves are
piled up in no particular order, but in sufficient quantities to make
a serious obstacle. It is not unusual to find in the leafy rampart
some dozens of pieces rolled into screws and fitting into one another
like a stack of cylindrical wafers. For this work of fortification,
artistic refinement seems superfluous; at any rate, the pieces of
leaves are for the most part irregular. You can see that the insect
has cut them out hurriedly, unmethodically and on a different pattern
from that of the pieces intended for the cells.

I am struck with another detail in the barricade. Its constituents
are taken from stout, thick, strong-veined leaves. I recognize young
vine-leaves, pale-coloured and velvety; the leaves of the whitish
rock-rose (Cistus albidus), lined with a hairy felt; those of the
holm-oak, selected among the young and bristly ones; those of the
hawthorn, smooth but tough; those of the cultivated reed, the only
one of the Monocotyledones exploited, as far as I know, by the
Megachiles. In the construction of cells, on the other hand, I see
smooth leaves predominating, notably those of the wild briar and of
the common acacia, the robinia. It would appear, therefore, that the
insect distinguishes between two kinds of materials, without being an
absolute purist and sternly excluding any sort of blending. The very
much indented leaves, whose projections can be completely removed
with a dexterous snip of the scissors, generally furnish the various
layers of the barricade; the little robinia-leaves, with their fine
texture and their unbroken edges, are better suited to the more
delicate work of the cells.

A rampart at the back of the Earth-worm's shaft is a wise precaution
and the Leaf-cutter deserves all credit for it; only it is a pity for
the Megachiles' reputation that this protective barrier often
protects nothing at all. Here we see, under a new guise, that
aberration of instinct of which I gave some examples in an earlier
chapter. My notes contain memoranda of various galleries crammed with
pieces of leaves right up to the orifice, which is on a level with
the ground, and entirely devoid of cells, even of an unfinished one.
These were ridiculous fortifications, of no use whatever; and yet the
Bee treated the matter with the utmost seriousness and took infinite
pains over her futile task. One of these uselessly barricaded
galleries furnished me with some hundred pieces of leaves arranged
like a stack of wafers; another gave me as many as a hundred and
fifty. For the defence of a tenanted nest, two dozen and even fewer
are ample. Then what was the object of the Leaf-cutter's ridiculous
pile?

I wish I could believe that, seeing that the place was dangerous, she
made her heap bigger so that the rampart might be in proportion to
the danger. Then, perhaps, at the moment of starting on the cells,
she disappeared, the victim of an accident, blown out of her course
by a gust of wind. But this line of defence is not admissible in the
Megachile's case. The proof is palpable: the galleries aforesaid are
barricaded up to the level of the ground; there is no room,
absolutely none, to lodge even a single egg. What was her object, I
ask again, when she persisted in obstinately piling up her wafers?
Has she really an object?

I do not hesitate to say no. And my answer is based upon what the
Osmiae taught me. I have described above how the Three-horned Osmia,
towards the end of her life, when her ovaries are depleted, expends
on useless operations such energy as remains to her. Born a worker,
she is bored by the inactivity of retirement; her leisure requires an
occupation. Having nothing better to do, she sets up partitions; she
divides a tunnel into cells that will remain empty; she closes with a
thick plug reeds containing nothing. Thus is the modicum of strength
of her decline exhausted in vain labours. The other Builder-bees
behave likewise. I see Anthidia laboriously provide numerous bales of
cotton to stop galleries wherein never an egg was laid; I see
Mason-bees build and then religiously close cells that will remain
unvictualled and uncolonized.

The long and useless barricades then belong to the last hours of the
Megachile's life, when the eggs are all laid; the mother, whose
ovaries are exhausted, persists in building. Her instinct is to cut
out and heap up pieces of leaves; obeying this impulse, she cuts out
and heaps up even when the supreme reason for this labour ceases. The
eggs are no longer there, but some strength remains; and that
strength is expended as the safety of the species demanded in the
beginning. The wheels of action go on turning in the absence of the
motives for action; they continue their movement as though by a sort
of acquired velocity. What clearer proof can we hope to find of the
unconsciousness of the animal stimulated by instinct?

Let us return to the Leaf-cutter's work under normal conditions.
Immediately after a protective barrier comes the row of cells, which
vary considerably in number, like those of the Osmia in her reed.
Strings of about a dozen are rare; the most frequent consist of five
or six. No less subject to variation is the number of pieces joined
to make a cell: pieces of two kinds, some, the oval ones, forming the
honey-pot; others, the round ones, serving as a lid. I count, on an
average, eight to ten pieces of the first kind. Though all cut on the
pattern of an ellipse, they are not equal in dimensions and come
under two categories. The larger, outside ones are each of them
almost a third of the circumference and overlap one another slightly.
Their lower end bends into a concave curve to form the bottom of the
bag. Those inside, which are considerably smaller, increase the
thickness of the sides and fill up the gaps left by the first.

The Leaf-cutter therefore is able to use her scissors according to
the task before her: first, the large pieces, which help the work
forward, but leave empty spaces; next, the small pieces, which fit
into the defective portions. The bottom of the cell particularly
comes in for after-touches. As the natural curve of the larger pieces
is not enough to provide a cup without cracks in it, the Bee does not
fail to improve the work with two or three small oval pieces applied
to the imperfect joins.

Another advantage results from the snippets of unequal size. The
three or four outer pieces, which are the first placed in position,
being the longest of all, project beyond the mouth, whereas the next,
being shorter, do not come quite up to it. A brim is thus obtained, a
ledge on which the round disks of the lid rest and are prevented from
touching the honey when the Bee presses them into a concave cover. In
other words, at the mouth the circumference comprises only one row of
leaves; lower down it takes two or three, thus restricting the
diameter and securing an hermetic closing.

The cover of the pot consists solely of round pieces, very nearly
alike and more or less numerous. Sometimes I find only two, sometimes
I count as many as ten, closely stacked. At times, the diameter of
these pieces is of an almost mathematical precision, so much so that
the edges of the disk rest upon the ledge. No better result would be
obtained had they been cut out with the aid of compasses. At times,
again, the piece projects slightly beyond the mouth, so that, to
enter, it has to be pressed down and curved cupwise. There is no
variation in the diameter of the first pieces placed in position,
those nearest to the honey. They are all of the same size and thus
form a flat cover which does not encroach on the cell and will not
afterwards interfere with the larva, as a convex ceiling would. The
subsequent disks, when the pile is numerous, are a little larger;
they only fit the mouth by yielding to pressure and becoming concave.
The Bee seems to make a point of this concavity, for it serves as a
mould to receive the curved bottom of the next cell.

When the row of cells is finished, the task still remains of blocking
up the entrance to the gallery with a safety-stopper similar to the
earthen plug with which the Osmia closes her reeds. The Bee then
returns to the free and easy use of the scissors which we noticed at
the beginning when she was fencing off the back part of the Earth-
worm's too deep burrow; she cuts out of the foliage irregular pieces
of different shapes and sizes and often retaining their original
deeply-indented margins; and with all these pieces, very few of which
fit at all closely the orifice to be blocked, she succeeds in making
an inviolable door, thanks to the huge number of layers.

Let us leave the Leaf-cutter to finish depositing her eggs in other
galleries, which will be colonized in the same manner, and consider
for a moment her skill as a cutter. Her edifices consist of a
multitude of fragments belonging to three categories: oval pieces for
the sides of the cells; round pieces for the lids; and irregular
pieces for the barricades at the front and back. The last present no
difficulty: the Bee obtains them by removing from the leaf some
projecting portion, as it stands, a serrate lobe which, owing to its
notches, shortens the insect's task and lends itself better to
scissor-work. So far, there is nothing to deserve attention: it is
unskilled labour, in which an inexperienced apprentice might excel.

With the oval pieces, it becomes another matter. What model has the
Megachile when cutting her neat ellipses out of the delicate material
for her wallets, the robinia-leaves? What mental pattern guides her
scissors? What system of measurement tells her the dimensions? One
would like to picture the insect as a living pair of compasses,
capable of tracing an elliptic curve by a certain natural inflexion
of its body, even as our arm traces a circle by swinging from the
shoulder. A blind mechanism, the mere outcome of its organization,
would alone be responsible for its geometry. This explanation would
tempt me if the large oval pieces were not accompanied by much
smaller ones, also oval, which are used to fill the empty spaces. A
pair of compasses which changes its radius of its own accord and
alters the curve according to the plan before it appears to me an
instrument somewhat difficult to believe in. There must be something
better than that. The circular pieces of the lid suggest it to us.

If, by the mere flexion inherent in her structure, the Leaf-cutter
succeeds in cutting out ovals, how does she succeed in cutting out
rounds? Can we admit the presence of other wheels in the machinery
for the new pattern, so different in shape and size? Besides, the
real point of the difficulty does not lie there. These rounds, for
the most part, fit the mouth of the jar with almost exact precision.
When the cell is finished, the Bee flies hundreds of yards away to
make the lid. She arrives at the leaf from which the disk is to be
cut. What picture, what recollection has she of the pot to be
covered? Why, none at all: she has never seen it; she does her work
underground, in utter darkness! At the utmost, she can have the
indications of touch: not actual indications, of course, for the pot
is not there, but past indications, useless in a work of precision.
And yet the disk to be cut out must have a fixed diameter: if it were
too large, it would not go in; if too small, it would close badly, it
would slip down on the honey and suffocate the egg. How shall it be
given its correct dimensions without a pattern? The Bee does not
hesitate for a moment. She cuts out her disk with the same celerity
which she would display in detaching any shapeless lobe that might do
for a stopper; and that disk, without further measurement, is of the
right size to fit the pot. Let whoso will explain this geometry,
which in my opinion is inexplicable, even when we allow for memory
begotten of touch and sight.

One winter evening, as we were sitting round the fire, whose cheerful
blaze unloosed our tongues, I put the problem of the Leaf-cutter to
my family:

'Among your kitchen-utensils,' I said, 'you have a pot in daily use;
but it has lost its lid, which was knocked over and broken by the
Tomcat playing among the shelves. To-morrow is market-day and one of
you will be going to Orange to buy the week's provisions. Would she
undertake, without a measure of any kind, with the sole aid of
memory, which we would allow her to refresh before starting by a
careful examination of the object, to bring back exactly what the pot
wants, a lid neither too large nor too small, in short the same size
as the top?'

It was admitted with one accord that nobody would accept such a
commission without taking a measure with her, or at least a bit of
string giving the width. Our memory for sizes is not accurate enough.
She would come back from the town with something that 'might do'; and
it would be the merest chance if this turned out to be the right
size.

Well, the Leaf-cutter is even less well-off than ourselves. She has
no mental picture of her pot, because she has never seen it; she is
not able to pick and choose in the crockery-dealer's heap, which acts
as something of a guide to our memory by comparison; she must,
without hesitation, far away from her home, cut out a disk that fits
the top of her jar. What is impossible to us is child's-play to her.
Where we could not do without a measure of some kind, a bit of
string, a pattern or a scrap of paper with figures upon it, the
little Bee needs nothing at all. In housekeeping matters she is
cleverer than we are.

One objection was raised. Was it not possible that the Bee, when at
work on the shrub, should first cut a round piece of an approximate
diameter, larger than that of the neck of the jar, and that
afterwards, on returning home, she should gnaw away the superfluous
part until the lid exactly fitted the pot? These alterations made
with the model in front of her would explain everything.

That is perfectly true; but are there any alterations? To begin with,
it seems to me hardly possible that the insect can go back to the
cutting once the piece is detached from the leaf: it lacks the
necessary support to gnaw the flimsy disk with any precision. A
tailor would spoil his cloth if he had not the support of a table
when cutting out the pieces for a coat. The Megachile's scissors, so
difficult to wield on anything not firmly held, would do equally bad
work.

Besides, I have better evidence than this for my refusal to believe
in the existence of alterations when the Bee has the cell in front of
her. The lid is composed of a pile of disks whose number sometimes
reaches half a score. Now the bottom part of all these disks is the
under surface of the leaf, which is paler and more strongly veined;
the top part is the upper surface, which is smooth and greener. In
other words, the insect places them in the position which they occupy
when gathered. Let me explain. In order to cut out a piece, the Bee
stands on the upper surface of the leaf. The piece detached is held
in the feet and is therefore laid with its top surface against the
insect's chest at the moment of departure. There is no possibility of
its being turned over on the journey. Consequently, the piece is laid
as the Bee has just picked it, with the lower surface towards the
inside of the cell and the upper surface towards the outside. If
alterations were necessary to reduce the lid to the diameter of the
pot, the disk would be bound to get turned over: the piece,
manipulated, set upright, turned round, tried this way and that,
would, when finally laid in position, have its top or bottom surface
inside just as it happened to come. But this is exactly what does not
take place. Therefore, as the order of stacking never changes, the
disks are cut, from the first clip of the scissors, with their proper
dimensions. The insect excels us in practical geometry. I look upon
the Leaf-cutter's pot and lid as an addition to the many other
marvels of instinct that cannot be explained by mechanics; I submit
it to the consideration of science; and I pass on.

The Silky Leaf-cutter (Megachile sericans, FONSCOL.; M. Dufourii,
LEP.) makes her nests in the disused galleries of the Anthophorae. I
know her to occupy another dwelling which is more elegant and affords
a more roomy installation: I mean the old dwelling of the fat
Capricorn, the denizen of the oaks. The metamorphosis is effected in
a spacious chamber lined with soft felt. When the long-horned Beetle
reaches the adult stage, he releases himself and emerges from the
tree by following a vestibule which the larva's powerful tools have
prepared beforehand. When the deserted cabin, owing to its position,
remains wholesome and there is no sign of any running from its walls,
no brown stuff smelling of the tan-yard, it is soon visited by the
Silky Megachile, who finds in it the most sumptuous of the apartments
inhabited by the Leaf-cutters. It combines every condition of
comfort: perfect safety, an even temperature, freedom from damp,
ample room; and so the mother who is fortunate enough to become the
possessor of such a lodging uses it entirely, vestibule and drawing-
room alike. Accommodation is found for all her family of eggs; at
least, I have nowhere seen nests as populous as here.

One of them provides me with seventeen cells, the highest number
appearing in my census of the Megachile clan. Most of them are lodged
in the nymphal chamber of the Capricorn; and, as the spacious recess
is too wide for a single row, the cells are arranged in three
parallel series. The remainder, in a single string, occupy the
vestibule, which is completed and filled up by the terminal
barricade. In the materials employed, hawthorn-and paliurus-leaves
predominate. The pieces, both in the cells and in the barrier, vary
in size. It is true that the hawthorn-leaves, with their deep
indentations, do not lend themselves to the cutting of neat oval
pieces. The insect seems to have detached each morsel without
troubling overmuch about the shape of the piece, so long as it was
big enough. Nor has it been very particular about arranging the
pieces according to the nature of the leaf: after a few bits of
paliurus come bits of vine and hawthorn; and these again are followed
by bits of bramble and paliurus. The Bee has collected her pieces
anyhow, taking a bit here and there, just as her fancy dictated.
Nevertheless, paliurus is the commonest, perhaps for economical
reasons.

I notice, in fact, that the leaves of this shrub, instead of being
used piecemeal, are employed whole, when they do not exceed the
proper dimensions. Their oval form and their moderate size suit the
insect's requirements; and there is therefore no necessity to cut
them into pieces. The leaf-stalk is clipped with the scissors and,
without more ado, the Megachile retires the richer by a first-rate
bit of material.

Split up into their component parts, two cells give me altogether
eighty-three pieces of leaves, whereof eighteen are smaller than the
others and of a round shape. The last-named come from the lids. If
they average forty-two each, the seventeen cells of the nest
represent seven hundred and fourteen pieces. These are not all: the
nest ends, in the Capricorn's vestibule, with a stout barricade in
which I count three hundred and fifty pieces. The total therefore
amounts to one thousand and sixty-four. All those journeys and all
that work with the scissors to furnish the deserted chamber of the
Cerambyx! If I did not know the Leaf-cutter's solitary and jealous
disposition, I should attribute the huge structure to the
collaboration of several mothers; but there is no question of
communism in this case. One dauntless creature and one alone, one
solitary, inveterate worker, has produced the whole of the prodigious
mass. If work is the best way to enjoy life, this one certainly has
not been bored during the few weeks of her existence.

I gladly award her the most honourable of eulogies, that due to the
industrious; and I also compliment her on her talent for closing the
honey-pots. The pieces stacked into lids are round and have nothing
to suggest those of which the cells and the final barricade are made.
Excepting the first, those nearest the honey, they are perhaps cut a
little less neatly than the disks of the White-girdled Leaf-cutter;
no matter: they stop the jar perfectly, especially when there are
some ten of them one above the other. When cutting them, the Bee was
as sure of her scissors as a dressmaker guided by a pattern laid on
the stuff; and yet she was cutting without a model, without having in
front of her the mouth to be closed. To enlarge on this interesting
subject would mean to repeat oneself. All the Leaf-cutters have the
same talent for making the lids of their pots.

A less mysterious question than this geometrical problem is that of
the materials. Does each species of Megachile keep to a single plant,
or has it a definite botanical domain wherein to exercise its liberty
of choice? The little that I have already said is enough to make us
suspect that the insect is not restricted to one plant; and this is
confirmed by an examination of the separate cells, piece by piece,
when we find a variety which we were far from imagining at first.
Here is the flora of the Megachiles in my neighbourhood, a very
incomplete flora and doubtless capable of considerable amplification
by future researches.

The Silky Leaf-cutter gathers the materials for her pots, her lids
and her barricades from the following plants: paliurus, hawthorn,
vine, wild briar, bramble, holm-oak, amelanchier, terebinthus, sage-
leaved rock-rose. The first three supply the greater part of the
leaf-work; the last three are represented only by rare fragments.

The Hare-footed Leaf-cutter (Megachile lagopoda, LIN.) which I see
very busy in my enclosure, though she only collects her materials
there, exploits the lilac and the rose-tree by preference. From time
to time, I see her also cutting bits out of the robinia, the quince-
tree and the cherry-tree. In the open country, I have found her
building with the leaves of the vine alone.

The Silvery Leaf-cutter (Megachile argentata, FAB.), another of my
guests, shares the taste of the aforesaid for the lilac and the rose,
but her domain includes in addition the pomegranate-tree, the
bramble, the vine, the common dogwood and the cornelian cherry.

The White-girdled Leaf-cutter likes the robinia, to which she adds,
in lavish proportions, the vine, the rose and the hawthorn and
sometimes, in moderation, the reed and the whitish-leaved rock-rose.

The Black-tipped Leaf-cutter (Megachile apicalis, SPIN.) has for her
abode the cells of the Mason-bee of the Pebbles and the ruined nests
of the Osmiae and Anthidia in the Snail-shells. I have not known her
to use any other materials than the wild briar and the hawthorn.

Incomplete though it be, this list tells us that the Megachiles do
not have exclusive botanical tastes. Each species manages extremely
well with several plants differing greatly in appearance. The first
condition to be fulfilled by the shrub exploited is that it be near
the nest. Frugal of her time, the Leaf-cutter declines to go on
distant expeditions. Whenever I come upon a recent Megachile-nest, I
am not long in finding in the neighbourhood, without much searching,
the tree or shrub from which the Bee has cut her pieces.

Another main condition is a fine and supple texture, especially for
the first disks used in the lid and for the pieces which form the
lining of the wallet. The rest, less carefully executed, allows of
coarser stuff; but even then the piece must be flexible and lend
itself to the cylindrical configuration of the tunnel. The leaves of
the rock-roses, thick and roughly fluted, fulfil this condition
unsatisfactorily, for which reason I see them occurring only at very
rare intervals. The insect has gathered pieces of them by mistake
and, not finding them good to use, has ceased to visit the
unprofitable shrub. Stiffer still, the leaf of the holm-oak in its
full maturity is never employed: the Silky Leaf-cutter uses it only
in the young state and then in moderation; she can get her velvety
pieces better from the vine. In the lilac-bushes so zealously
exploited before my eyes by the Hare-footed Leaf-cutter occur a
medley of different shrubs which, from their size and the lustre of
their leaves, should apparently suit that sturdy pinker. They are the
shrubby hare's-ear, the honeysuckle, the prickly butcher's-broom, the
box. What magnificent disks ought to come from the hare's-ear and the
honeysuckle! One could get an excellent piece, without further
labour, by merely cutting the leaf-stalk of the box, as Megachile
sericans does with her paliurus. The lilac-lover disdains them
absolutely. For what reason? I fancy that she finds them too stiff.
Would she think differently if the lilac-bush were not there? Perhaps
so.

In short, apart from the questions of texture and proximity to the
nest, the Megachile's choice, it seems to me, must depend upon
whether a particular shrub is plentiful or not. This would explain
the lavish use of the vine, an object of widespread cultivation, and
of the hawthorn and the wild briar, which form part of all our
hedges. As these are to be found everywhere, the fact that the
different Leaf-cutters make use of them is no reflection upon a host
of equivalents varying according to the locality.

If we had to believe what people tell us about the effects of
heredity, which is said to hand down from generation to generation,
ever more firmly established, the individual habits of those who come
before, the Megachiles of these parts, experienced in the local flora
by the long training of the centuries, but complete novices in the
presence of plants which their race encounters for the first time,
ought to refuse as unusual and suspicious any exotic leaves,
especially when they have at hand plenty of the leaves made familiar
by hereditary custom. The question was deserving of separate study.

Two subjects of my observations, the Hare-footed and the Silvery
Leaf-cutter, both of them inmates of my open-air laboratory, gave me
a definite answer. Knowing the points frequented by the two
Megachiles, I planted in their work-yard, overgrown with briar and
lilac, two outlandish plants which seemed to me to fulfil the
required conditions of suppleness of texture, namely, the ailantus, a
native of Japan, and the Virginian physostegia. Events justified the
selection: both Bees exploited the foreign flora with the same
assiduity as the local flora, passing from the lilac to the ailantus,
from the briar to the physostegia, leaving the one, going back to the
other, without drawing distinctions between the known and the
unknown. Inveterate habit could not have given greater certainty,
greater ease to their scissors, though this was their first
experience of such a material.

The Silvery Leaf-cutter lent herself to an even more conclusive test.
As she readily makes her nest in the reeds of my apparatus, I was
able, up to a certain point, to create a landscape for her and select
its vegetation myself. I therefore moved the reed-hive to a part of
the enclosure stocked chiefly with rosemary, whose scanty foliage is
not adapted for the Bee's work, and near the apparatus I arranged an
exotic shrubbery in pots, including notably the smooth lopezia, from
Mexico, and the long-fruited capsicum, an Indian annual. Finding
close at hand the wherewithal to build her nest, the Leaf-cutter went
no further afield. The lopezia suited her especially, so much so that
almost the whole nest was composed of it. The rest had been gathered
from the capsicum.

Another recruit, whose co-operation I had in no way engineered, came
spontaneously to offer me her evidence. This was the Feeble Leaf-
cutter (Megachile imbecilla, GERST.). Nearly a quarter of a century
ago, I saw her, all through the month of July, cutting out her rounds
and ellipses at the expense of the petals of the Pelargonium zonale,
the common geranium. Her perseverance devastated--there is no other
word for it--my modest array of pots. Hardly was a blossom out, when
the ardent Megachiles came and scalloped it into crescents. The
colour was indifferent to her: red, white or pink, all the petals
underwent the disastrous operation. A few captures, ancient relics of
my collecting-boxes by this time, indemnified me for the pillage. I
have not seen this unpleasant Bee since. With what does she build
when there are no geranium-flowers handy? I do not know; but the fact
remains that the fragile tailoress used to attack the foreign flower,
a fairly recent acquisition from the Cape, as though all her race had
never done anything else.

These details leave us with one obvious conclusion, which is contrary
to our original ideas, based on the unvarying character of insect
industry. In constructing their jars, the Leaf-cutters, each
following the taste peculiar to her species, do not make use of this
or that plant to the exclusion of the others; they have no definite
flora, no domain faithfully transmitted by heredity. Their pieces of
leaves vary according to the surrounding vegetation; they vary in
different layers of the same cell. Everything suits them, exotic or
native, rare or common, provided that the bit cut out be easy to
employ. It is not the general aspect of the shrub, with its fragile
or bushy branches, its large or small, green or grey, dull or glossy
leaves, that guides the insect: such advanced botanical knowledge
does not enter into the question at all. In the thicket chosen as a
pinking-establishment, the Megachile sees but one thing: leaves
useful for her work. The Shrike, with his passion for plants with
long, woolly sprigs, knows where to find nicely-wadded substitutes
when his favourite growth, the cotton-rose, is lacking; the Megachile
has much wider resources: indifferent to the plant itself, she looks
only into the foliage. If she finds leaves of the proper size, of a
dry texture capable of defying the damp and of a suppleness
favourable to cylindrical curving, that is all she asks; and the rest
does not matter. She has therefore an almost unlimited field for her
labour.

These sudden and wholly unprovoked changes give cause for reflection.
When my geranium-flowers were devastated, how had the obtrusive Bee,
untroubled by the profound dissimilarity between the petals, snow-
white here, bright scarlet there, how had she learnt her trade?
Nothing tells us that she herself was not for the first time
exploiting the plant from the Cape; and, if she really did have
predecessors, the habit had not had time to become inveterate,
considering the modern importation of the geranium. Where again did
the Silvery Megachile, for whom I created an exotic shrubbery, make
the acquaintance of the lopezia, which comes from Mexico? She
certainly is making a first start. Never did her village or mine
possess a stalk of that chilly denizen of our hot-houses. She is
making a first start; and behold her straightway a graduate, versed
in the art of carving unfamiliar foliage.

People often talk of the long apprenticeships served by instinct, of
its gradual acquirements, of its talents, the laborious work of the
ages. The Megachiles affirm the exact opposite. They tell me that the
animal, though invariable in the essence of its art, is capable of
innovation in the details; but at the same time they assure me that
any such innovation is sudden and not gradual. Nothing prepares the
innovations, nothing improves them or hands them down; otherwise a
selection would long ago have been made amid the diversity of
foliage; and the shrub recognized as the most serviceable, especially
when it is also plentiful, would alone supply all the building-
materials needed. If heredity transmitted industrial discoveries, a
Megachile who thought of cutting her disks out of pomegranate-leaves
and found them satisfactory ought to have instilled a liking for
similar materials into her descendants; and we should this day find
Leaf-cutters faithful to the pomegranate-leaves, workers who remained
exclusive in their choice of the raw material. The facts refute these
theories.

People also say:

'Grant us a variation, however small, in the insect's industry; and
that variation, accentuated more and more, will produce a new race
and finally a fixed species.'

This trifling variation is the fulcrum for which Archimedes clamoured
in order to lift the world with his system of levers. The Megachiles
offer us one and a very great one: the indefinite variation of their
materials. What will the theorists' levers lift with this fulcrum?
Why, nothing at all! Whether they cut the delicate petals of the
geranium or the tough leaves of the lilac-bushes, the Leaf-cutters
are and will be what they were. This is what we learn from the
persistence of each species in its structural details, despite the
great variety of the foliage employed.


CHAPTER 9. THE COTTON-BEES.

The evidence of the Leaf-cutters proves that a certain latitude is
left to the insect in its choice of materials for the nest; and this
is confirmed by the testimony of the Anthidia, the cotton-
manufacturers. My district possesses five: A. Florentinum, LATR., A.
diadema, LATR., A. manicatum, LATR., A. cingulatum, LATR., A.
scapulare, LATR. None of them creates the refuge in which the cotton
goods are manufactured. Like the Osmiae and the Leaf-cutters, they
are homeless vagrants, adopting, each to her own taste, such shelter
as the work of others affords. The Scapular Anthidium is loyal to the
dry bramble, deprived of its pith and turned into a hollow tube by
the industry of various mining Bees, among which figure, in the front
rank, the Ceratinae, dwarf rivals of the Xylocopa, or Carpenter-bee,
that mighty driller of rotten wood. The spacious galleries of the
Masked Anthophora suit the Florentine Anthidium, the foremost member
of the genus so far as size is concerned. The Diadem Anthidium
considers that she has done very well if she inherits the vestibule
of the Hairy-footed Anthophora, or even the ordinary burrow of the
Earth-worm. Failing anything better, she may establish herself in the
dilapidated dome of the Mason-bee of the Pebbles. The Manicate
Anthidium shares her tastes. I have surprised the Girdled Anthidium
cohabiting with a Bembex-wasp. The two occupants of the cave dug in
the sand, the owner and the stranger, were living in peace, both
intent upon their business. Her usual habitation is some hole or
other in the crevices of a ruined wall. To these refuges, the work of
others, we can add the stumps of reeds, which are as popular with the
various cotton-gatherers as with the Osmiae; and, after we have
mentioned a few most unexpected retreats, such as the sheath provided
by a hollow brick or the labyrinth furnished by the lock of a gate,
we shall have almost exhausted the list of domiciles.

Like the Osmiae and the Leaf-cutters, the Anthidium shows an urgent
need of a ready-made home. She never houses herself at her own
expense. Can we discover the reason? Let us first consult a few hard
workers who are artificers of their own dwellings. The Anthophora
digs corridors and cells in the road-side banks hardened by the sun;
she does not erect, she excavates; she does not build, she clears.
Toiling away with her mandibles, atom by atom, she manages to
contrive the passages and chambers necessary for her eggs; and a huge
business it is. She has, in addition, to polish and glaze the rough
sides of her tunnels. What would happen if, after obtaining a home by
dint of long-continued toil, she had next to line it with wadding, to
gather the fibrous down from cottony plants and to felt it into bags
suitable for the honey-paste? The hard-working Bee would not be equal
to producing all these refinements. Her mining calls for too great an
expenditure of time and strength to leave her the leisure for
luxurious furnishing. Chambers and corridors, therefore, will remain
bare.

The Carpenter-bee gives us the same answer. When with her joiner's
wimble she has patiently bored the beam to a depth of nine inches,
would she be able to cut out and place in position the thousand and
one pieces which the Silky Leaf-cutter employs for her nest? Time
would fail her, even as it would fail a Megachile who, lacking the
Capricorn's chamber, had herself to dig a home in the trunk of the
oak. Therefore the Carpenter-bee, after the tedious work of boring,
gets the installation done in the most summary fashion, simply
running up a sawdust partition.

The two things, the laborious business of obtaining a lodging and the
artistic work of furnishing, seem unable to go together. With the
insect as with man, he who builds the house does not furnish it, he
who furnishes it does not build it. To each his share, because of
lack of time. Division of labour, the mother of the arts, makes the
workman excel in his department; one man for the whole work would
mean stagnation, the worker never getting beyond his first crude
attempts. Animal industry is a little like our own: it does not
attain its perfection save with the aid of obscure toilers, who,
without knowing it, prepare the final masterpiece. I see no other
reason for this need of a gratuitous lodging for the Megachile's
leafy basket or the Anthidia's cotton purses. In the case of other
artists who handle delicate things that require protection, I do not
hesitate to assume the existence of a ready-made home. Thus Reaumur
tells us of the Upholsterer-bee, Anthocopa papaveris, who fashions
her cells with poppy-petals. I do not know the flower-cutter, I have
never seen her; but her art tells me plainly enough that she must
establish herself in some gallery wrought by others, as, for
instance, in an Earth-worm's burrow.

We have but to see the nest of a Cotton-bee to convince ourselves
that its builder cannot at the same time be an indefatigable navvy.
When and newly-felted and not yet made sticky with honey, the wadded
purse is by far the most elegant known specimen of entomological
nest-building, especially where the cotton is of a brilliant white,
as is frequently the case in the manufacturers of the Girdled
Anthidium. No bird's-nest, however deserving of our admiration, can
vie in fineness of flock, in gracefulness of form, in delicacy of
felting with this wonderful bag, which our fingers, even with the aid
of tools, could hardly imitate, for all their dexterity. I abandon
the attempt to understand how, with its little bales of cotton
brought up one by one, the insect, no otherwise gifted than the
kneaders of mud and the makers of leafy baskets, manages to felt what
it has collected into a homogeneous whole and then to work the
product into a thimble-shaped wallet. Its tools as a master-fuller
are its legs and its mandibles, which are just like those possessed
by the mortar-kneaders and Leaf-cutters; and yet, despite this
similarity of outfit, what a vast difference in the results obtained!

To see the Cotton-bees' talents in action seems an undertaking
fraught with innumerable difficulties: things happen at a depth
inaccessible to the eye; and to persuade the insect to work in the
open does not lie in our power. One resource remained and I did not
fail to turn to it, though hitherto I have been wholly unsuccessful.
Three species, Anthidium diadema, A. manicatum and A. florentinum--
the first-named in particular--show themselves quite ready to take up
their abode in my reed-apparatus. All that I had to do was to replace
the reeds by glass tubes, which would allow me to watch the work
without disturbing the insect. This stratagem had answered perfectly
with the Three-horned Osmia and Latreille's Osmia, whose little
housekeeping-secrets I had learnt thanks to the transparent dwelling-
house. Why should it not answer for its Cotton-bees and, in the same
way, with the Leaf-cutters? I almost counted on success. Events
betrayed my confidence. For four years I supplied my hives with glass
tubes and not once did the Cotton-weavers or the Leaf-cutters
condescend to take up their quarters in the crystal palaces. They
always preferred the hovel provided by the reed. Shall I persuade
them one day? I do not abandon all hope.

Meanwhile, let me describe the little that I saw. More or less
stocked with cells, the reed is at last closed, right at the orifice,
with a thick plug of cotton, usually coarser than the wadding of the
honey-satchels. It is the equivalent of the Three-horned Osmia's
barricade of mud, of the leaf-putty of Latreille's Osmia, of the
Megachiles' barrier of leaves cut into disks. All these free tenants
are careful to shut tight the door of the dwelling, of which they
have often utilized only a portion. To watch the building of this
barricade, which is almost external work, demands but a little
patience in waiting for the favourable moment.

The Anthidium arrives at last, carrying the bale of cotton for the
plugging. With her fore-legs she tears it apart and spreads it out;
with her mandibles, which go in closed and come out open, she loosens
the hard lumps of flock; with her forehead she presses each new layer
upon the one below. And that is all. The insect flies off, returns
the richer by another bale and repeats the performance until the
cotton barrier reaches the level of the opening. We have here,
remember, a rough task, in no way to be compared with the delicate
manufacturer of the bags; nevertheless, it may perhaps tell us
something of the general procedure of the finer work. The legs do the
carding, the mandibles the dividing, the forehead the pressing; and
the play of these implements produces the wonderful cushioned wallet.
That is the mechanism in the lump; but what of the artistry?

Let us leave the unknown for facts within the scope of observation. I
will question the Diadem Anthidium in particular, a frequent inmate
of my reeds. I open a reed-stump about two decimetres long by twelve
millimetres in diameter. (About seven and three-quarter inches by
half an inch.--Translator's Note.) The end is occupied by a column of
cotton-wool comprising ten cells, without any demarcation between
them on the outside, so that their whole forms a continuous cylinder.
Moreover, thanks to a close felting, the different compartments are
soldered together, so much so that, when pulled by the end, the
cotton edifice does not break into sections, but comes out all in one
piece. One would take it for a single cylinder, whereas in reality
the work is composed of a series of chambers, each of which has been
constructed separately, independently of the one before, except
perhaps at the base.

For this reason, short of ripping up the soft dwelling, still full of
honey, it is impossible to ascertain the number of storeys; we must
wait until the cocoons are woven. Then our fingers can tell the cells
by counting the knots that resist pressure under the cover of
wadding. This general structure is easily explained. A cotton bag is
made, with the sheath of the reed as a mould. If this guiding sheath
were lacking, the thimble shape would be obtained all the same, with
no less elegance, as is proved by the Girdled Anthidium, who makes
her nest in some hiding-place or other in the walls or the ground.
When the purse is finished, the provisions come and the egg, followed
by the closing of the cell. We do not here find the geometrical lid
of the Leaf-cutters, the pile of disks tight-set in the mouth of the
jar. The bag is closed with a cotton sheet whose edges are soldered
by a felting-process to the edges of the opening. The soldering is so
well done that the honey-pouch and its cover form an indivisible
whole. Immediately above it, the second cell is constructed, having
its own base. At the beginning of this work, the insect takes care to
join the two storeys by felting the ceiling of the first to the floor
of the second. Thus continued to the end, the work, with its inner
solderings, becomes an unbroken cylinder, in which the beauties of
the separate wallets disappear from view. In very much the same
fashion, but with less adhesion among the different cells, do the
Leaf-cutters act when stacking their jars in a column without any
external division into storeys.

Let us return to the reed-stump which gives us these details. Beyond
the cotton-wool cylinder wherein ten cocoons are lodged in a row
comes an empty space of half a decimetre or more. (About two inches.-
-Translator's Note.) The Osmiae and the Leaf-cutters are also
accustomed to leave these long, deserted vestibules. The nest ends,
at the orifice of the reed, with a strong plug of flock coarser and
less white than that of the cells. This use of closing-materials
which are less delicate in texture but of greater resisting-power,
while not an invariable characteristic, occurs frequently enough to
make us suspect that the insect knows how to distinguish what is best
suited now to the snug sleeping-berth of the larvae, anon to the
defensive barricade of the home. Sometimes the choice is an
exceedingly judicious one, as is shown by the nest of the Diadem
Anthidium. Time after time, whereas the cells were composed of the
finest grade of white cotton, gathered from Centaurea solsticialis,
or St. Barnaby's thistle, the barrier at the entrance, differing from
the rest of the work in its yellow colouring, was a heap of close-set
bristles supplied by the scallop-leaved mullein. The two functions of
the wadding are here plainly marked. The delicate skin of the larvae
needs a well-padded cradle; and the mother collects the softest
materials that the cottony plants provide. Rivalling the bird, which
furnishes the inside of the nest with wool and strengthens the
outside with sticks, she reserves for the grubs' mattress the finest
down, so hard to find and collected with such patience. But, when it
becomes a matter of shutting the door against the foe, then the
entrance bristles with forbidding caltrops, with stiff, prickly
hairs.

This ingenious system of defence is not the only one known to the
Anthidia. More distrustful still, the Manicate Anthidium leaves no
space in the front part of the reed. Immediately after the column of
cells, she heaps up, in the uninhabited vestibule, a conglomeration
of rubbish, whatever chance may offer in the neighbourhood of the
nest: little pieces of gravel, bits of earth, grains of sawdust,
particles of mortar, cypress-catkins, broken leaves, dry Snail-
droppings and any other material that comes her way. The pile, a real
barricade this time, blocks the reed completely to the end, except
about two centimetres (About three-quarters of an inch.--Translator's
Note.) left for the final cotton plug. Certainly no foe will break in
through the double rampart; but he will make an insidious attack from
the rear. The Leucopsis will come and, with her long probe, thanks to
some imperceptible fissure in the tube, will insert her dread eggs
and destroy every single inhabitant of the fortress. Thus are the
Manicate Anthidium's anxious precautions outwitted.

If we had not already seen the same thing with the Leaf-cutters, this
would be the place to enlarge upon the useless tasks undertaken by
the insect when, with its ovaries apparently depleted, it goes on
spending its strength with no maternal object in view and for the
sole pleasure of work. I have come across several reeds stopped up
with flock though containing nothing at all, or else furnished with
one, two or three cells devoid of provisions or eggs. The ever-
imperious instinct for gathering cotton and felting it into purses
and heaping it into barricades persists, fruitlessly, until life
fails. The Lizard's tail wriggles, curls and uncurls after it is
detached from the animal's body. In these reflex movements, I seem to
see not an explanation, certainly, but a rough image of the
industrious persistency of the insect, still toiling away at its
business, even when there is nothing useful left to do. This worker
knows no rest but death.

I have said enough about the dwelling of the Diadem Anthidium; let us
look at the inhabitant and her provisions. The honey is pale-yellow,
homogeneous and of a semifluid consistency, which prevents it from
trickling through the porous cotton bag. The egg floats on the
surface of the heap, with the end containing the head dipped into the
paste. To follow the larva through its progressive stages is not
without interest, especially on account of the cocoon, which is one
of the most singular that I know. With this object in view, I prepare
a few cells that lend themselves to observation. I take a pair of
scissors, slice a piece off the side of the cotton-wool purse, so as
to lay bare both the victuals and the consumer, and place the ripped
cell in a short glass tube. During the first few days, nothing
striking happens. The little grub, with its head still plunged in the
honey, slakes its thirst with long draughts and waxes fat. A moment
comes...But let us go back a little farther, before broaching this
question of sanitation.

Every grub, of whatever kind, fed on provisions collected by the
mother and placed in a narrow cell is subject to conditions of health
unknown to the roving grub that goes where it likes and feeds itself
on what it can pick up. The first, the recluse, is no more able than
the second, the gadabout, to solve the problem of a food which can be
entirely assimilated, without leaving an unclean residue. The second
gives no thought to these sordid matters: any place suits it for
getting rid of that difficulty. But what will the other do with its
waste matter, cooped up as it is in a tiny cell stuffed full of
provisions? A most unpleasant mixture seems inevitable. Picture the
honey-eating grub floating on liquid provisions and fouling them at
intervals with its excretions! The least movement of the hinder-part
would cause the whole to amalgamate; and what a broth that would make
for the delicate nursling! No, it cannot be; those dainty epicures
must have some method of escaping these horrors.

They all have, in fact, and most original methods at that. Some take
the bull by the horns, so to speak, and, in order not to soil things,
refrain from uncleanliness until the end of the meal: they keep the
dropping-trap closed as long as the victuals are unfinished. This is
a radical scheme, but not in every one's power, it appears. It is the
course adopted, for instance, by the Sphex-wasps and the Anthophora-
bees, who, when the whole of the food is consumed, expel at one shot
the residues amassed in the intestines since the commencement of the
repast.

Others, the Osmiae in particular, accept a compromise and begin to
relieve the digestive tract when a suitable space has been made in
the cell through the gradual disappearance of the victuals. Others
again--more hurried these--find means of obeying the common law
pretty early by engaging in stercoral manufactures. By a stroke of
genius, they make the unpleasant obstruction into building-bricks. We
already know the art of the Lily-beetle (Crioceris merdigera. Fabre's
essay on this insect has not yet been translated into English; but
readers interested in the matter will find a full description in "An
Introduction to Entomology," by William Kirby, Rector of Barham, and
William Spence: letter 21.--Translator's Note.), who, with her soft
excrement, makes herself a coat wherein to keep cool in spite of the
sun. It is a very crude and revolting art, disgusting to the eye. The
Diadem Anthidium belongs to another school. With her droppings she
fashions masterpieces of marquetry and mosaic, which wholly conceal
their base origin from the onlooker. Let us watch her labours through
the windows of my tubes.

When the portion of food is nearly half consumed, there begins and
goes on to the end a frequent defecation of yellowish droppings, each
hardly the size of a pin's head. As these are ejected, the grub
pushes them back to the circumference of the cell with a movement of
its hinder-part and keeps them there by means of a few threads of
silk. The work of the spinnerets, therefore, which is deferred in the
others until the provisions are finished, starts earlier here and
alternates with the feeding. In this way, the excretions are kept at
a distance, away from the honey and without any danger of getting
mixed with it. They end by becoming so numerous as to form an almost
continuous screen around the larva. This excremental awning, made
half of silk and half of droppings, is the rough draft of the cocoon,
or rather a sort of scaffolding on which the stones are deposited
until they are definitely placed in position. Pending the piecing
together of the mosaic, the scaffolding keeps the victuals free from
all contamination.

To get rid of what cannot be flung outside, by hanging it on the
ceiling, is not bad to begin with; but to use it for making a work of
art is better still. The honey has disappeared. Now commences the
final weaving of the cocoon. The grub surrounds itself with a wall of
silk, first pure white, then tinted reddish-brown by means of an
adhesive varnish. Through its loose-meshed stuff, it seizes one by
one the droppings hanging from the scaffold and inlays them firmly in
the tissue. The same mode of work is employed by the Bembex-, Stizus-
and Tachytes-wasps and other inlayers, who strengthen the inadequate
woof of their cocoons with grains of sand; only, in their cotton-wool
purses, the Anthidium's grubs substitute for the mineral particles
the only solid materials at their disposal. For them, excrement takes
the place of pebbles.

And the work goes none the worse for it. On the contrary: when the
cocoon is finished, any one who had not witnessed the process of
manufacture would be greatly puzzled to state the nature of the
workmanship. The colouring and the elegant regularity of the outer
wrapper of the cocoon suggest some kind of basket-work made with tiny
bits of bamboo, or a marquetry of exotic granules. I too let myself
be caught by it in my early days and wondered in vain what the hermit
of the cotton wallet had used to inlay her nymphal dwelling so
prettily withal. To-day, when the secret is known to me, I admire the
ingenuity of the insect capable of obtaining the useful and the
beautiful out of the basest materials.

The cocoon has another surprise in store for us. The end containing
the head finishes with a short conical nipple, an apex, pierced by a
narrow shaft that establishes a communication between the inside and
the out. This architectural feature is common to all the Anthidia, to
the resin-workers who will occupy our attention presently, as well as
to the cotton-workers. It is found nowhere outside the Anthidium
group.

What is the use of this point which the larva leaves bare instead of
inlaying it like the rest of the shell? What is the use of that hole,
left quite open or, at most, closed at the bottom with a feeble
grating of silk? The insect appears to attach great importance to it,
from what I see. In point of fact, I watch the careful work of the
apex. The grub, whose movements the hole enables me to follow,
patiently perfects the lower end of the conical channel, polishes it
and gives it an exactly circular shape; from time to time, it inserts
into the passage its two closed mandibles, whose points project a
little way outside; then, opening them to a definite radius, like a
pair of compasses, it widens the aperture and makes it regular.

I imagine, without venturing, however, to make a categorical
statement, that the perforated apex is a chimney to admit the air
required for breathing. Every pupa breathes in its shell, however
compact this may be, even as the unhatched bird breathes inside the
egg. The thousands of pores with which the shell is pierced allow the
inside moisture to evaporate and the outer air to penetrate as and
when needed. The stony caskets of the Bembex- and Stizus-wasps are
endowed, notwithstanding their hardness, with similar means of
exchange between the vitiated and the pure atmosphere. Can the shells
of the Anthidia be air-proof, owing to some modification that escapes
me? In any case, this impermeability cannot be attributed to the
excremental mosaic, which the cocoons of the resin-working Anthidia
do not possess, though endowed with an apex of the very best.

Shall we find an answer to the question in the varnish with which the
silken fabric is impregnated? I hesitate to say yes and I hesitate to
say no, for a host of cocoons are coated with a similar lacquer
though deprived of communication with the outside air. All said,
without being able at present to account for its necessity, I admit
that the apex of the Anthidia is a breathing-aperture. I bequeath to
the future the task of telling us for what reasons the collectors of
both cotton and resin leave a large pore in their shells, whereas all
the other weavers close theirs completely.

After these biological curiosities, it remains for me to discuss the
principal subject of this chapter: the botanical origin of the
materials of the nest. By watching the insect when busy at its
harvesting, or else by examining its manufactured flock under the
microscope, I was able to learn, not without a great expenditure of
time and patience, that the different Anthidia of my neighbourhood
have recourse without distinction to any cottony plant. Most of the
wadding is supplied by the Compositae, particularly the following:
Centaurea solsticialis, or St. Barnaby's thistle; C. paniculata, or
panicled centaury; Echinops ritro, or small globe-thistle; Onopordon
illyricum, or Illyrian cotton-thistle; Helichrysum staechas, or wild
everlasting; Filago germanica, or common cotton-rose. Next come the
Labiatae: Marrubium vulgare, or common white horehound; Ballota
fetida, or stinking horehound; Calamintha nepeta, or lesser calamint;
Salvia aethiopis, or woolly sage. Lastly, the Solanaceae: Verbascum
thapsus, or shepherd's club; V. sinuatum, or scollop-leaved mullein.

The Cotton-bees' flora, we see, incomplete as it is in my notes,
embraces plants of very different aspect. There is no resemblance in
appearance between the proud candelabrum of the cotton-thistle, with
its red tufts, and the humble stalk of the globe-thistle, with its
sky-blue capitula; between the plentiful leaves of the mullein and
the scanty foliage of the St. Barnaby's thistle; between the rich
silvery fleece of the woolly sage and the short hairs of the
everlasting. With the Anthidium, these clumsy botanical
characteristics do not count; one thing alone guides her: the
presence of cotton. Provided that the plant be more or less well-
covered with soft wadding, the rest is immaterial to her.

Another condition, however, has to be fulfilled, apart from the
fineness of the cotton-wool. The plant, to be worth shearing, must be
dead and dry. I have never seen the harvesting done on fresh plants.
In this way, the Bee avoids mildew, which would make its appearance
in a mass of hairs still filled with sap.

Faithful to the plant recognized as yielding good results, the
Anthidium arrives and resumes her gleaning on the edges of the parts
denuded by earlier harvests. Her mandibles scrape away and pass the
tiny fluffs, one by one, to the hind-legs, which hold the pellet
pressed against the chest, mix with it the rapidly-increasing store
of down and make the whole into a little ball. When this is the size
of a pea, it goes back into the mandibles; and the insect flies off,
with its bale of cotton in its mouth. If we have the patience to
wait, we shall see it return to the same point, at intervals of a few
minutes, so long as the bag is not made. The foraging for provisions
will suspend the collecting of cotton; then, next day or the day
after, the scraping will be resumed on the same stalk, on the same
leaf, if the fleece be not exhausted. The owner of a rich crop
appears to keep to it until the closing-plug calls for coarser
materials; and even then this plug is often manufactured with the
same fine flock as the cells.

After ascertaining the diversity of cotton-fields among our native
plants, I naturally had to enquire whether the Cotton-bee would also
put up with exotic plants, unknown to her race; whether the insect
would show any hesitation in the presence of woolly plants offered
for the first time to the rakes of her mandibles. The common clary
and the Babylonian centaury, with which I have stocked the harmas,
shall be the harvest-fields; the reaper shall be the Diadem
Anthidium, the inmate of my reeds.

The common clary, or toute-bonne, forms part, I know, of our French
flora to-day; but it is an acclimatized foreigner. They say that a
gallant crusader, returning from Palestine with his share of glory
and bruises, brought back the toute-bonne from the Levant to help him
cure his rheumatism and dress his wounds. From the lordly manor, the
plant propagated itself in all directions, while remaining faithful
to the walls under whose shelter the noble dames of yore used to grow
it for their unguents. To this day, feudal ruins are its favourite
resorts. Crusaders and manors disappeared; the plant remained. In
this case, the origin of the clary, whether historical or legendary,
is of secondary importance. Even if it were of spontaneous growth in
certain parts of France, the toute-bonne is undoubtedly a stranger in
the Vaucluse district. Only once in the course of my long botanizing-
expeditions across the department have I come upon this plant. It was
at Caromb, in some ruins, nearly thirty years ago. I took a cutting
of it; and since then the crusaders' sage has accompanied me on all
my peregrinations. My present hermitage possesses several tufts of
it: but, outside the enclosure, except at the foot of the walls, it
would be impossible to find one. We have, therefore, a plant that is
new to the country for many miles around, a cotton-field which the
Serignan Cotton-bees had never utilized before I came and sowed it.

Nor had they ever made use of the Babylonian centaury, which I was
the first to introduce in order to cover my ungrateful stony soil
with some little vegetation. They had never seen anything like the
colossal centaury imported from the region of the Euphrates. Nothing
in the local flora, not even the cotton-thistle, had prepared them
for this stalk as thick as a child's wrist, crowned at a height of
nine feet with a multitude of yellow balls, nor for those great
leaves spreading over the ground in an enormous rosette. What will
they do in the presence of such a find? They will take possession of
it with no more hesitation than if it were the humble St. Barnaby's
thistle, the usual purveyor.

In fact, I place a few stalks of clary and Babylonian centaury, duly
dried, near the reed-hives. The Diadem Anthidium is not long in
discovering the rich harvest. Straight away the wool is recognized as
being of excellent quality, so much so that, during the three or four
weeks of nest-building, I can daily witness the gleaning, now on the
clary, now on the centaury. Nevertheless the Babylonian plant appears
to be preferred, no doubt because of its whiter, finer and more
plentiful down. I keep a watchful eye on the scraping of the
mandibles and the work of the legs as they prepare the pellet; and I
see nothing that differs from the operations of the insect when
gleaning on the globe-thistle and the St. Barnaby's thistle. The
plant from the Euphrates and the plant from Palestine are treated
like those of the district.

Thus we find what the Leaf-cutters taught us proved, in another way,
by the cotton-gatherers. In the local flora, the insect has no
precise domain; it reaps its harvest readily now from one species,
now from another, provided that it find the materials for its
manufactures. The exotic plant is accepted quite as easily as that of
indigenous growth. Lastly, the change from one plant to another, from
the common to the rare, from the habitual to the exceptional, from
the known to the unknown, is made suddenly, without gradual
initiations. There is no novitiate, no training by habit in the
choice of the materials for the nest. The insect's industry, variable
in its details by sudden, individual and non-transmissible
innovations, gives the lie to the two great factors of evolution:
time and heredity.


CHAPTER 10. THE RESIN-BEES.

At the time when Fabricius (Johann Christian Fabricius (1745-1808), a
noted Danish entomologist, author of "Systema entomologiae" (1775).--
Translator's Note.) gave the genus Anthidium its name, a name still
used in our classifications, entomologists troubled very little about
the live animal; they worked on corpses, a dissecting-room method
which does not yet seem to be drawing to an end. They would examine
with a conscientious eye the antenna, the mandible, the wing, the
leg, without asking themselves what use the insect had made of those
organs in the exercise of its calling. The animal was classified very
nearly after the manner adopted in crystallography. Structure was
everything; life, with its highest prerogatives, intellect, instinct,
did not count, was not worthy of admission into the zoological
scheme.

It is true that an almost exclusively necrological study is
obligatory at first. To fill one's boxes with insects stuck on pins
is an operation within the reach of all; to watch those same insects
in their mode of life, their work, their habits and customs is quite
a different thing. The nomenclator who lacks the time--and sometimes
also the inclination--takes his magnifying-glass, analyzes the dead
body and names the worker without knowing its work. Hence the number
of appellations the least of whose faults is that they are unpleasant
to the ear, certain of them, indeed, being gross misnomers. Have we
not, for instance, seen the name of Lithurgus, or stone-worker, given
to a Bee who works in wood and nothing but wood? Such absurdities
will be inevitable until the animal's profession is sufficiently
familiar to lend its aid in the compiling of diagnoses. I trust that
the future will see this magnificent advance in entomological
science: men will reflect that the impaled specimens in our
collections once lived and followed a trade; and anatomy will be kept
in its proper place and made to leave due room for biology.

Fabricius did not commit himself with his expression Anthidium, which
alludes to the love of flowers, but neither did he mention anything
characteristic: as all Bees have the same passion in a very high
degree, I see no reason to treat the Anthidia as more zealous looters
than the others. If he had known their cotton nests, perhaps the
Scandinavian naturalist would have given them a more logical
denomination. As for me, in a language wherein technical parade is
out of place, I will call them the Cotton-bees.

The term requires some limiting.  To judge by my finds, in fact, the
old genus Anthidium, that of the classifying entomologists, comprises
in my district two very different corporations. One is known to us
and works exclusively in wadding; the other, which we are about to
study, works in resin, without ever having recourse to cotton.
Faithful to my extremely simple principle of defining the worker, as
far as possible, by his work, I will call the members of this guild
the Resin-bees. Thus confining myself to the data supplied by my
observations, I divide the Anthidium group into equal sections, of
equal importance, for which I demand special generic titles; for it
is highly illogical to call the carders of wool and the kneaders of
resin by the same name. I surrender to those whom it concerns the
honour of effecting this reform in the orthodox fashion.

Good luck, the friend of the persevering, made me acquainted in
different parts of Vaucluse with four Resin-bees whose singular trade
no one had yet suspected. To-day, I find them all four again in my
own neighbourhood. They are the following: Anthidium septemdentatum,
LATR., A. bellicosum, LEP., A. quadrilobum, LEP., and A. Latreillii,
LEP. The first two make their nests in deserted Snail-shells; the
other two shelter their groups of cells sometimes in the ground,
sometimes under a large stone. We will first discuss the inhabitants
of the Snail-shell. I made a brief reference to them in an earlier
chapter, when speaking of the distribution of the sexes. This mere
allusion, suggested by a study of a different kind, must now be
amplified. I return to it with fuller particulars.

The stone-heaps in the Roman quarries near Serignan, which I have so
often visited in search of the nests of the Osmia who takes up her
abode in Snail-shells, supply me also with the two Resin-bees
installed in similar quarters. When the Field-mouse has left behind
him a rich collection of empty shells scattered all round his hay
mattress under the slab, there is always a hope of finding some
Snail-shells plugged with mud and, here and there, mixed with them, a
few Snail-shells closed with resin. The two Bees work next door to
each other, one using clay, the other gum. The excellence of the
locality is responsible for this frequent cohabitation, shelter being
provided by the broken stone from the quarry and lodgings by the
shells which the Mouse has left behind.

At places where dead Snail-shells are few and far between, as in the
crevices of rustic walls, each Bee occupies by herself the shells
which she has found. But here, in the quarries, our crop will
certainly be a double or even a treble one, for both Resin-bees
frequent the same heaps. Let us, therefore, lift the stones and dig
into the mound until the excessive dampness of the subsoil tells us
that it is useless to look lower down. Sometimes at the moment of
removing the first layer, sometimes at a depth of eighteen inches, we
shall find the Osmia's Snail-shell and, much more rarely, the Resin-
bee's. Above all, patience!  The job is none of the most fruitful;
nor is it exactly an agreeable one. By dint of turning over
uncommonly jagged stones, our fingertips get hurt, lose their skin
and become as smooth as though we had held them on a grindstone.
After a whole afternoon of this work, our back will be aching, our
fingers will be itching and smarting and we shall possess a dozen
Osmia-nests and perhaps two or three Resin-bees' nests. Let us be
content with that.

The Osmia's shells can be recognized at once, as being closed at the
orifice with a clay cover. The Anthidium's call for a special
examination, without which we should run a great risk of filling our
pockets with cumbersome rubbish. We find a dead Snail-shell among the
stones. Is it inhabited by the Resin-bee or not? The outside tells us
nothing. The Anthidium's work comes at the bottom of the spiral, a
long way from the mouth; and, though this is wide open, the eye
cannot travel far enough along the winding stair. I hold up the
doubtful shell to the light. If it is completely transparent, I know
that it is empty and I put it back to serve for future nests. If the
second whorl is opaque, the spiral contains something. What does it
contain? Earth washed in by the rain? Remnants of the putrefied
Snail? That remains to be seen. With a little pocket-trowel, the
inquisitorial implement which always accompanies me, I make a wide
window in the middle of the final whorl. If I see a gleaming resin
floor, with incrustations of gravel, the thing is settled: I possess
an Anthidium's nest. But, oh the number of failures that go to one
success! The number of windows vainly opened in shells whose bottom
is stuffed with clay or with noisome corpses! Thus picking shells
among the overturned stone-heaps, inspecting them in the sun,
breaking into them with the trowel and nearly always rejecting them,
I manage, after repeated attempts, to obtain my materials for this
chapter.

The first to hatch is the Seven-pronged Resin-bee (Anthidium
septemdentatum). We see her, in the month of April, lumbering along
to the rubbish-heaps in the quarries and the low boundary-walls, in
search of her Snail-shell. She is a contemporary of the Three-horned
Osmia, who begins operations in the last week of April, and often
occupies the same stone-heap, settling in the next shell. She is
well-advised to start work early and to be on neighbourly terms with
the Osmia when the latter is building; in fact, we shall soon see the
terrible dangers to which that same proximity exposes her dilatory
rival in resin-work, Anthidium bellicosum.

The shell adopted in the great majority of cases is that of the
Common Snail, Helix aspersa.  It is sometimes of full size, sometimes
half-developed. Helix nemoralis and H. caespitum, which are much
smaller, also supply suitable lodgings; and this would as surely
apply to any shell of sufficient capacity, if the places which I
explore possessed others, as witness a nest which my son Emile has
sent me from somewhere near Marseilles. This time, the Resin-bee is
settled in Helix algira, the most remarkable of our land-shells
because of the width and regularity of its spiral, which is copied
from that of the Ammonites. This magnificent nest, a perfect specimen
of both the Snail's work and the Bee's, deserves description before
any other.

For a distance of three centimetres (1.17 inches.--Translator's
Note.) from the mouth, the last spiral whorl contains nothing. At
this inconsiderable depth, a partition is clearly seen. The moderate
diameter of the passage accounts for the Anthidium's choice of this
site to which our eye can penetrate. In the common Snail-shell, whose
cavity widens rapidly, the insect establishes itself much farther
back, so that, in order to see the terminal partition, we must, as I
have said, make a lateral inlet. The position of this boundary-
ceiling, which may come farther forward or farther back, depends on
the variable diameter of the passage. The cells of the cocoons
require a certain length and a certain breadth, which the mother
finds by going higher up or lower down in the spiral, according to
the shape of the shell. When the diameter is suitable, the last whorl
is occupied up to the orifice, where the final lid appears,
absolutely exposed to view.  This is the case with the adult Helix
nemoralis and H. caespitum, and also with the young Common Snail. We
will not linger at present over this peculiarity, the importance of
which will become manifest shortly.

Whether in the front or at the back of the spiral slope, the insect's
work ends in a facade of coarse mosaic, formed of small, angular bits
of gravel, firmly cemented with a gum the nature of which has to be
ascertained. It is an amber-coloured material, semi-transparent,
brittle, soluble in spirits of wine and burning with a sooty flame
and a strong smell of resin. From these characteristics it is evident
that the Bee prepares her gum with the resinous drops exuded by the
Coniferae.

I think that I am even able to name the particular plant, though I
have never caught the insect in the act of gathering its materials.
Hard by the stone-heaps which I turn over for my collections there is
a plentiful supply of brown-berried junipers. Pines are totally
absent; and the cypress only appears occasionally near the houses.
Moreover, among the vegetable remains which we shall see assisting in
the protection of the nest, we often find the juniper's catkins and
needles. As the resin-insect is economical of its time and does not
fly far from the quarters familiar to it, the gum must have been
collected on the shrub at whose foot the materials for the barricade
have been gathered. Nor is this merely a local circumstance, for the
Marseilles nest abounds in similar remnants. I therefore regard the
juniper as the regular resin-purveyor, without, however, excluding
the pine, the cypress and other Coniferae when the favourite shrub is
absent.

The bits of gravel in the lid are angular and chalky in the
Marseilles nest; they are round and flinty in most of the Serignan
nests. In making her mosaic, the worker pays no heed to the form or
colour of its component parts; she collects indiscriminately anything
that is hard enough and not too large. Sometimes she lights upon
treasures that give her work a more original character. The
Marseilles nest shows me, neatly encrusted amid the bits of gravel, a
tiny whole landshell, Pupa cineres. A nest in my own neighbourhood
provides me with a pretty Snail-shell, Helix striata, forming a rose-
pattern in the middle of the mosaic. These little artistic details
remind me of a certain nest of Eumenes Amadei (A Mason-wasp, forming
the subject of an essay which has not yet been published in English.-
-Translator's Note.) which abounds in small shells. Ornamental shell-
work appears to number its lovers among the insects.

After the lid of resin and gravel, an entire whorl of the spiral is
occupied by a barricade of incongruous remnants, similar to that
which, in the reeds, protects the row of cocoons of the Manicate
Cotton-bee. It is curious to see exactly the same defensive methods
employed by two builders of such different talents, one of whom
handles flock, the other gum. The nest from Marseilles has for its
barricade bits of chalky gravel, particles of earth, fragments of
sticks, a few scraps of moss and especially juniper-catkins and
needles.  The Serignan nests, installed in Helix aspersa, have almost
the same protective materials. I see bits of gravel, the size of a
lentil, and the catkins and needles of the brown-berried juniper
predominating. Next come the dry excretions of the Snail and a few
rare little land-shells. A similar jumble of more or less everything
found near the nest forms, as we know, the barricade of the Manicate
Cotton-bee, who is also an adept at using the Snail's stercoral
droppings after these have been dried in the sun. Let us observe
finally that these dissimilar materials are heaped together without
any cementing, just as the insect has picked them up. Resin plays no
part in the mass; and we have only to pierce the lid and turn the
shell upside down for the barricade to come dribbling to the ground.
To glue the whole thing together does not enter into the Resin-bee's
scheme. Perhaps such an expenditure of gum is beyond her means;
perhaps the barricade, if hardened into a solid block, would
afterwards form an invincible obstacle to the escape of the
youngsters; perhaps again the mass of gravel is an accessory rampart,
run up roughly as a work of secondary importance.

Amid these doubtful matters, I see at least that the insect does not
look upon its barricade as indispensable. It employs it regularly in
the large shells, whose last whorl, too spacious to be used, forms an
unoccupied vestibule; it neglects it in the moderate shells, such as
Helix nemoralis, in which the resin lid is level with the orifice. My
excavations in the stone-heaps supply me with an almost equal number
of nests with and without defensive embankments. Among the Cotton-
bees, the Manicate Anthidium is not faithful either to her fort of
little sticks and stones; I know some of her nests in which cotton
serves every purpose. With both of them, the gravel rampart seems
useful only in certain circumstances, which I am unable to specify.

On the other side of the outworks of the fortification, the lid and
barricade, are the cells set more or less far down in the spiral,
according to the diameter of the shell. They are bounded back and
front by partitions of pure resin, without any encrustations of
mineral particles. Their number is exceedingly restricted and is
usually limited to two. The front room, which is larger because the
width of the passage goes on increasing, is the abode of a male,
superior in size to the other sex; the less spacious back room
contains a female. I have already drawn attention in an earlier
chapter to the wonderful problem submitted for our consideration by
this breaking up of the laying into couples and this alternation of
the males and females. Without calling for other work than the
transverse partitions, the broadening stairway of the Snail-shell
thus furnishes both sexes with house-room suited to their size.

The second Resin-bee that inhabits shells, Anthidium bellicosum,
hatches in July and works during the fierce heat of August. Her
architecture differs in no wise from that of her kinswoman of the
springtime, so much so that, when we find a tenanted Snail-shell in a
hole in the wall or under the stones, it is impossible to decide to
which of the two species the nest belongs. The only way to obtain
exact information is to break the shell and split the cocoons in
February, at which time the nests of the summer Resin-bee are
occupied by larvae and those of the spring Resin-bee by the perfect
insect. If we shrink from this brutal method, we are still in doubt
until the cocoons open, so great is the resemblance between the two
pieces of work.

In both cases, we find the same lodging, Snail-shells of every size
and every kind, just as they happen to come; the same resin lid, the
inside gritty with tiny bits of stone, the outside almost smooth and
sometimes ornamented with little shells; the same barricade--not
always present--of various kinds of rubbish; the same division into
two rooms of unequal size occupied by the two sexes. Everything is
identical, down to the purveyor of the gum, the brown-berried
juniper. To say more about the nest of the summer Resin-bee would be
to repeat oneself.

There is only one thing that requires further investigation. I do not
see the reason that prompts the two insects to leave the greater part
of their shell empty in front, instead of occupying it entirely up to
the orifice as the Osmia habitually does. As the mother's laying is
broken up into intermittent shifts of a couple of eggs apiece, is it
necessary that there should be a new home for each shift? Is the
half-fluid resin unsuitable for the wide-spanned roofs which would
have to be constructed when the diameter of the helical passage
exceeded certain limits? Is the gathering of the cement too wearisome
a task to leave the Bee any strength for making the numerous
partitions which she would need if she utilized the spacious final
whorl? I find no answer to these questions. I note the fact without
interpreting it: when the shell is a large one, the front part,
almost the whole of the last whorl, remains an empty vestibule.

To the spring Resin-bee, Anthidium septemdentatum, this less than
half occupied lodging presents no drawbacks. A contemporary of the
Osmia, often her neighbour under the same stone, the gum-worker
builds her nest at the same period as the mud-worker; but there is no
fear of mutual encroachments, for the two Bees, working next door to
each other, watch their respective properties with a jealous eye. If
attempts at usurpation were to be made, the owner of the Snail-shell
would know how to enforce her rights as the first occupant.

For the summer Resin-bee, A. bellicosum, the conditions are very
different. At the moment when the Osmia is building, she is still in
the larval, or at most in the nymphal stage. Her abode, which would
not be more absolutely silent if deserted, her shell, with its vast
untenanted porch, will not tempt the earlier Resin-bee, who herself
wants apartments right at the far end of the spiral, but it might
suit the Osmia, who knows how to fill the shell with cells up to the
mouth. The last whorl left vacant by the Anthidium is a magnificent
lodging which nothing prevents the mason from occupying. The Osmia
does seize upon it, in fact, and does so too often for the welfare of
the unfortunate late-comer. The final resin lid takes the place, for
the Osmia, of the mud stopper with which she cuts off at the back the
portion of the spiral too narrow for her labours. Upon this lid she
builds her mass of cells in so many storeys, after which she covers
the whole with a thick defensive plug. In short, the work is
conducted as though the Snail-shell contained nothing.

When July arrives, this doubly-tenanted house becomes the scene of a
tragic conflict. Those below, on attaining the adult state, burst
their swaddling-bands, demolish their resin partitions, pass through
the gravel barricade and try to release themselves; those above,
larvae still or budding pupae, prisoners in their shells until the
following spring, completely block the way. To force a passage from
the far-end of those catacombs is beyond the strength of the Resin-
bee, already weakened by the effort of breaking out of her own nest.
A few of the Osmia's partitions are damaged, a few cocoons receive
slight injuries; and then, worn out with vain struggles, the captives
abandon hope and perish behind the impregnable wall of earth. And
with them perish also certain parasites, even less fit for the
prodigious work of clearance: Zonites and Chryses (Chrysis flammea),
of whom the first are consumers of provisions and the second of
grubs.

This lamentable ending of the Resin-bee, buried alive under the
Osmia's walls, is not a rare accident to be passed over in silence or
mentioned in a few words; on the contrary, it happens very often; and
its frequency suggests this thought: the school which sees in
instinct an acquired habit treats the slightest favourable occurrence
in the course of animal industry as the starting-point of an
improvement which, transmitted by heredity and becoming in time more
and more accentuated, at last grows into a settled characteristic
common to the whole race. There is, it is true, a total absence of
positive proofs in support of this theory; but it is stated with a
wealth of hypothesis that leaves a thousand loopholes: 'Granting
that...Supposing that...It may be...nothing need prevent us from
believing... It is quite possible...' Thus argued the master; and the
disciples have not yet hit upon anything better.

'If the sky were to fall,' said Rabelais, 'the larks would all be
caught.'

Yes, but the sky stays up; and the larks go on flying.

'If things happened in such and such a way,' says our friend,
'instinct may have undergone variations and modifications.'

Yes, but are you quite sure that things happened as you say?

I banish the word 'if' from my vocabulary. I suppose nothing, I take
nothing for granted; I pluck the brutal fact, the only thing that can
be trusted; I record it and then ask myself what conclusion rests
upon its solid framework. From the fact which I have related we may
draw the following inference:

'You say that any modification profitable to the animal is
transmitted throughout a series of favoured ones who, better equipped
with tools, better endowed with aptitudes, abandon the ancient usages
and replace the primitive species, the victim of the struggle for
life. You declare that once, in the dim distance of the ages, a Bee
found herself by accident in possession of a dead Snail-shell. The
safe and peaceful lodging pleased her fancy. On and on went the
hereditary liking; and the Snail-shell proved more and more agreeable
to the insect's descendants, who began to look for it under the
stones, so that later generations, with the aid of habit, ended by
adopting it as the ancestral dwelling. Again by accident, the Bee
happened upon a drop of resin.  It was soft, plastic, well-suited for
the partitioning of the Snail-shell; it soon hardened into a solid
ceiling. The Bee tried the resinous gum and benefited by it. Her
successors also benefited by it, especially after improving it.
Little by little, the rubble-work of the lid and of the gravel
barricade was invented: an enormous improvement, of which the race
did not fail to take advantage. The defensive fortification was the
finishing-touch to the original structure. Here we have the origin
and development of the instinct of the Resin-bees who make their home
in Snail-shells.'

This glorious genesis of insect ways and means lacks just one little
thing: probability. Life everywhere, even among the humble, has two
phases: its share of good and its share of evil. Avoiding the latter
and seeking the former is the rough balance-sheet of life's actions.
Animals, like ourselves, have their portion of the sweet and the
bitter: they are just as anxious to reduce the second as to increase
the first; for, with them as with us,

De malheurs evites le bonheur se compose.
(Bad luck missed is good luck gained.)

If the Bee has so faithfully handed down her casual invention of a
resin nest built inside a Snail-shell, then there is no denying that
she must have just as faithfully handed down the means of averting
the terrible danger of belated hatchings. A few mothers, escaping at
rare intervals from the catacombs blocked by the Osmiae, must have
retained a lively memory, a powerful impression of their desperate
struggle through the mass of earth; they must have inspired their
descendants with a dread of those vast dwellings where the stranger
comes afterwards and builds; they must have taught them by habit the
means of safety, the use of the medium-sized shell, which the nest
fills to the mouth. So far as the prosperity of the race was
concerned, the discontinuance of the system of empty vestibules was
far more important than the invention of the barricade, which is not
altogether indispensable: it would have saved them from perishing
miserably, behind impenetrable walls, and would have considerably
increased the numbers of their posterity.

Thousands and thousands of experiments have been made throughout the
ages with Snail-shells of average dimensions: the thing is certain,
because I find many of them to-day. Well, have these life-saving
experiments, with their immense importance to the race, become
general by hereditary bequest? Not at all: the Resin-bee persists in
using big Snail-shells just as though her ancestors had never known
the danger of the Osmia-blocked vestibule. Once these facts are duly
recognized, the conclusion is irresistible: it is obvious that, as
the insect does not hand down the casual modification tending towards
the avoidance of what is to its disadvantage, neither does it hand
down the modification leading to the adoption of what is to its
advantage. However lively the impression made upon the mother, the
accidental leaves no trace in the offspring. Chance plays no part in
the genesis of the instincts.

Next to these tenants of the Snail-shells we have two other Resin-
bees who never come to the shells for a cabin for their nests. They
are Anthidium quadrilobum, LEP., and A. Latreillii, LEP., both
exceedingly uncommon in my district. If we meet them very rarely,
however, this may well be due to the difficulty of seeing them; for
they lead extremely solitary and wary lives. A warm nook under some
stone or other; the deserted streets of an Ant-hill in a sun-baked
bank; a Beetle's vacant burrow a few inches below the ground; in
short, a cavity of some sort, perhaps arranged by the Bee's own care:
these are the only establishments which I know them to occupy. And
here, with no other shelter than the cover of the refuge, they build
a mass of cells joined together and grouped into a sphere, which, in
the case of the Four-lobed Resin-bee, attains the size of a man's
fist and, in that of Latreille's Resin-bee, the size of a small
apple.

At first sight, we remain very uncertain as to the nature of the
strange ball. It is brown, rather hard, slightly sticky, with a
bituminous smell. Outside are encrusted a few bits of gravel,
particles of earth, heads of large-sized Ants. This cannibal trophy
is not a sign of barbarous customs: the Bee does not decapitate Ants
to adorn her hut. An inlayer, like her colleagues of the Snail-shell,
she gathers any hard granule near at hand capable of strengthening
her work; and the dried skulls of Ants, which are frequent around
about her abode, are in her eyes building-stones of equal value to
the pebbles. One and all employ whatever they can find without much
seeking. The inhabitant of the shell, in order to construct her
barricade, makes shift with the dry excrement of the nearest Snail;
the denizen of the flat stones and of the roadside banks frequented
by the Ants does what she can with the heads of the defunct and,
should these be lacking, is ready to replace them with something
else. Moreover, the defensive inlaying is slight; we see that the
insect attaches no great importance to it and has every confidence in
the stout wall of the home.

The material of which the work is made at first suggests some rustic
wax, much coarser than that of the Bumble-bees, or rather some tar of
unknown origin. We think again and then recognize in the puzzling
substance the semitransparent fracture, the quality of becoming soft
when exposed to heat and of burning with a smoky flame, the
solubility in spirits of wine--in short, all the distinguishing
characteristics of resin. Here then are two more collectors of the
exudations of the Coniferae. At the points where I find their nests
are Aleppo pines, cypresses, brown-berried junipers and common
junipers. Which of the four supplies the mastic? There is nothing to
tell us. Nor is there anything to explain how the native amber-colour
of the resin is replaced in the work of both Bees by a dark-brown hue
resembling that of pitch. Does the insect collect resin impaired by
the weather, soiled by the sanies of rotten wood? When kneading it,
does it mix some dark ingredient with it? I look upon this as
possible, but not as proved, since I have never seen the Bee
collecting her resin.

While this point escapes me, another of higher interest appears most
plainly; and that is the large amount of resinous material used in a
single nest, especially in that of Anthidium quadrilobum, in which I
have counted as many as twelve cells. The nest of the Mason-bee of
the Pebbles is hardly more massive. For so costly an establishment,
therefore, the Resin-bee collects her pitch on the dead pine as
copiously as the Mason-bee collects her mortar on the macadamized
road. Her workshop no longer shows us the niggardly partitioning of a
Snail-shell with two or three drops of resin; what we see is the
whole building of the house, from the basement to the roof, from the
thick outer walls to the partitions of the rooms. The cement expended
would be enough to divide hundreds of Snail-shells, wherefore the
title of Resin-bee is due first and foremost to this master-builder
in pitch. Honourable mention should be awarded to A. Latreillii, who
rivals her fellow-worker as far as her smaller stature permits. The
other manipulators of resin, those who build partitions in Snail-
shells, come third, a very long way behind.

And now, with the facts to support us, let us philosophize a little.
We have here, recognized as of excellent standard by all the expert
classifiers, so fastidious in the arrangement of their lists, a
generic group, called Anthidium, containing two guilds of workers
entirely dissimilar in character: the cotton-fullers and the resin-
kneaders.  It is even possible that other species, when their habits
are better known, will come and increase this variety of
manufactures.  I confine myself to the little that I know and ask
myself in what the manipulator of cotton differs from the manipulator
of resin as regards tools, that is to say, organs. Certainly, when
the genus Anthidium was set down by the classifiers, they were not
wanting in scientific precision: they consulted, under the lens of
the microscope, the wings, the mandibles, the legs, the harvesting-
brush, in short, all the details calculated to assist the proper
delimitation of the group. After this minute examination by the
experts, if no organic differences stand revealed, the reason is that
they do not exist. Any dissimilarity of structure could not escape
the accurate eyes of our learned taxonomists. The genus, therefore,
is indeed organically homogeneous; but industrially it is thoroughly
heterogeneous. The implements are the same and the work is different.

That eminent Bordeaux entomologist, Professor Jean Perez, to whom I
communicated the misgivings aroused in my mind by the contradictory
nature of my discoveries, thinks that he has found the solution of
the difficulty in the conformation of the mandibles. I extract the
following passage from his volume, "Les Abeilles":

'The cotton-pressing females have the edge of their mandibles cut out
into five or six little teeth, which make an instrument admirably
suited for scraping and removing the hairs from the epidermis of the
plants. It is a sort of comb or teasel. The resin-kneading females
have the edge of the mandible not toothed, but simply curved; the tip
alone, preceded by a notch which is pretty clearly marked in some
species, forms a real tooth; but this tooth is blunt and does not
project. The mandible, in short, is a kind of spoon perfectly fitted
to remove the sticky matter and to shape it into a ball.'

Nothing better could be said to explain the two sorts of industry: in
the one case, a rake which gathers the wool; in the other, a spoon
which scoops up the resin. I should have left it at that and felt
quite content without further investigation, if I had not had the
curiosity to open my boxes and, in my turn, to take a good look, side
by side, at the workers in cement and the workers in cotton. Allow
me, my learned master, to whisper in your ear what I saw.

The first that I examine is Anthidium septemdentatum. A spoon: yes,
it is just that. Powerful mandibles, shaped like an isosceles
triangle, flat above, hollowed out below; and no indentations, none
whatsoever. A splendid tool, as you say, for gathering the viscous
pellet; quite as efficacious in its kind of work as is the rake of
the toothed mandibles for gathering cotton. Here certainly is a
creature potently-gifted, even though it be for a poor little task,
the scooping up of two or three drops of glue.

Things are not quite so satisfactory with the second Resin-bee of the
Snail-shells, A. bellicosum. I find that she has three teeth to her
mandibles. Still, they are slight and project very little. Let us say
that this does not count, even though the work is exactly the same.
With A. quadrilobum the whole thing breaks down. She, the queen of
Resin-bees; she, who collects a lump of mastic the size of one's
fist, enough to subdivide hundreds of her kinswomen's Snail-shells:
well, she, by way of a spoon, carries a rake! On the wide edges of
her mandibles stand four teeth, as long and pointed as those of the
most zealous cotton-gleaner. A. florentinum, that mighty manufacturer
of cotton-goods, can hardly rival her in respect of combing-tools.
And nevertheless, with her toothed implement, a sort of saw, the
Resin-bee collects her great heap of pitch, load by load; and the
material is carried not rigid, but sticky, half-fluid, so that it may
amalgamate with the previous lots and be fashioned into cells.

A. Latreillii, without having a very large implement, also bears
witness to the possibility of heaping up soft resin with a rake; she
arms her mandibles with three or four sharply-cut teeth. In short,
out of four Resin-bees, the only four that I know, one is armed with
a spoon, if this expression be really suited to the tool's function;
the three others are armed with a rake; and it so happens that the
most copious heap of resin is just the work of the rake with the most
teeth to it, a tool suited to the cotton-reapers, according to the
views of the Bordeaux entomological expert.

No, the explanation that appealed to me so much at first is not
admissible. The mandible, whether supplied with teeth or not, does
not account at all for the two manufactures. May we, in this
predicament, have recourse to the general structure of the insect,
although this is not distinctive enough to be of much use to us? Not
so either; for, in the same stone-heaps where the Osmia and the two
Resin-bees of the Snail-shells work, I find from time to time another
manipulator of mastic who bears no structural relationship whatever
to the genus Anthidium. It is a small-sized Mason-wasp, Odynerus
alpestris, SAUSS. She builds a very pretty nest with resin and gravel
in the shells of the young Common Snail, of Helix nemoralis and
sometimes of Bulimulus radiatus. I will describe her masterpiece on
some other occasion. To one acquainted with the genus Odynerus, any
comparison with the Anthidia would be an inexcusable error. In larval
diet, in shape, in habits, they form two dissimilar groups, very far
removed one from the other. The Anthidia feed their offspring on
honey-bread; the Odyneri feed it on live prey. Well, with her slender
form, her weakly frame, in which the most clear-seeing eye would seek
in vain for a clue to the trade practised, the Alpine Odynerus, the
game-lover, uses pitch in the same way as the stout and massive
Resin-bee, the honey-lover. She even uses it better, for her mosaic
of tiny pebbles is much prettier than the Bee's and no less solid.
With her mandibles, this time neither spoon nor rake, but rather a
long forceps slightly notched at the tip, she gathers her drop of
sticky matter as dexterously as do her rivals with their very
different outfit. Her case will, I think, persuade us that neither
the shape of the tool nor the shape of the worker can explain the
work done.

I will go further: I ask myself in vain the reason of this or that
trade in the case of a fixed species. The Osmiae make their
partitions with mud or with a paste of chewed leaves; the Mason-bees
build with cement; the Pelopaeus-wasps fashion clay pots; the
Megachiles made disks cut from leaves into urns; the Anthidia felt
cotton into purses; the Resin-bees cement together little bits of
gravel with gum; the Carpenter-bees and the Lithurgi bore holes in
timber; the Anthophorae tunnel the roadside slopes. Why all these
different trades, to say nothing of the others? How are they
prescribed for the insect, this one rather than that?

I foresee the answer: they are prescribed by the organization. An
insect excellently equipped for gathering and felting cotton is ill-
equipped for cutting leaves, kneading mud or mixing resin. The tool
in its possession decides its trade.

This is a very simple explanation, I admit, and one within the scope
of everybody: in itself a sufficient recommendation for any one who
has neither the inclination nor the time to undertake a more thorough
investigation. The popularity of certain speculative views is due
entirely to the easy food which they provide for our curiosity. They
save us much long and often irksome study; they impart a veneer of
general knowledge. There is nothing that achieves such immediate
success as an explanation of the riddle of the universe in a word or
two. The thinker does not travel so fast: content to know little so
that he may know something, he limits his field of search and is
satisfied with a scanty harvest, provided that the grain be of good
quality. Before agreeing that the tool determines the trade, he wants
to see things with his own eyes; and what he observes is far from
confirming the sweeping statement. Let us share his doubts for a
moment and look into matters more closely.

Franklin left us a maxim which is much to the point here. He said
that a good workman should be able to plane with a saw and to saw
with a plane. The insect is too good a workman not to follow the
advice of the sage of Boston. Its industry abounds in instances where
the plane takes the place of the saw, or the saw of the plane; its
dexterity makes good the inadequacy of the implement. To go no
further, have we not just seen different artisans collecting and
using pitch, some with spoons, others with rakes, others again with
pincers? Therefore, with such equipment as it possesses, the insect
would be capable of abandoning cotton for leaves, leaves for resin,
resin for mortar, if some predisposition of talent did not make it
keep to its speciality.

These few lines, which are the outcome not of a heedless pen but of
mature reflection, will set people talking of hateful paradoxes. We
will let them talk and we will submit the following proposition to
our adversaries: take an entomologist of the highest merit, a
Latreille (Pierre Andre Latreille (1762-1833), one of the founders of
modern entomological science.--Translator's Note.), for instance,
versed in all the details of the structure of insects but utterly
unacquainted with their habits. He knows the dead insect better than
anybody, but he has never occupied himself with the living insect. As
a classifier, he is beyond compare; and that is all. We ask him to
examine a Bee, the first that comes to hand, and to name her trade
from her tools.

Come, be honest: could he? Who would dare put him to such a test? Has
personal experience not fully convinced us that the mere examination
of the insect can tell us nothing about its particular industry? The
baskets on its legs and the brush on its abdomen will certainly
inform us that it collects honey and pollen; but its special art will
remain an utter secret, notwithstanding all the scrutiny of the
microscope. In our own industries, the plane denotes the joiner, the
trowel the mason, the scissors the tailor, the needle the seamstress.
Are things the same in animal industry? Just show us, if you please,
the trowel that is a certain sign of the mason-insect, the chisel
that is a positive characteristic of the carpenter-insect, the iron
that is an authentic mark of the pinking-insect; and as you show
them, say:

'This one cuts leaves; that one bores wood; that other mixes cement.'

And so on, specifying the trade from the tool.

You cannot do it, no one can; the worker's speciality remains an
impenetrable secret until direct observation intervenes. Does not
this incapacity, even of the most expert, proclaim loudly that animal
industry, in its infinite variety, is due to other causes besides the
possession of tools? Certainly, each of those specialists requires
implements; but they are rough and ready implements, good for all
sorts of purposes, like the tool of Franklin's workman. The same
notched mandible that reaps cotton, cuts leaves and moulds pitch also
kneads mud, scrapes decayed wood and mixes mortar; the same tarsus
that manufactures cotton and disks cut out of leaves is no less
clever at the art of making earthen partitions, clay turrets and
gravel mosaics.

What then is the reason of these thousand industries? In the light of
facts, I can see but one: imagination governing matter. A primordial
inspiration, a talent antecedent to the actual form, directs the tool
instead of being subordinate to it. The instrument does not determine
the manner of industry; the tool does not make the workman. At the
beginning there is an object, a plan, in view of which the animal
acts, unconsciously. Have we eyes to see with, or do we see because
we have eyes? Does the function create the organ, or the organ the
function? Of the two alternatives, the insect proclaims the first. It
says:

'My industry is not imposed upon me by the implement which I possess;
what I do is to use the implement, such as it is, for the talent with
which I am gifted.'

It says to us, in its own way:

'The function has determined the organ; vision is the reason of the
eye.'

In short, it repeats to us Virgil's profound reflection:

'Mens agitat molem'; 'Mind moves matter.'


CHAPTER 11. THE POISON OF THE BEE.

I have discussed elsewhere the stings administered by the Wasps to
their prey. Now chemistry comes and puts a spoke in the wheel of our
arguments, telling us that the poison of the Bees is not the same as
that of the Wasps. The Bees' is complex and formed of two elements,
acid and alkaline. The Wasps' possess only the acid element; and it
is to this very acidity and not to the 'so-called' skill of the
operators that the preservation of the provisions is due. (The
author's numerous essays on the Wasps will form the contents of later
works. In the meantime, cf. "Insect Life," by J.H. Fabre, translated
by the author of "Mademoiselle Mori": chapters 4 to 12, and 14 to 18;
and "The Life and Love of the Insect," by J. Henri Fabre, translated
by Alexander Teixeira de Mattos: chapters 11, 12 and 17.--
Translator's Note.)

Admitting that there is a difference in the nature of the venom, I
fail to see that this has any bearing on the problem in hand. I can
inoculate with various liquids--acids, weak nitric acid, alkalis,
ammonia, neutral bodies, spirits of wine, essence of turpentine--and
obtain conditions similar to those of the victims of the predatory
insects, that is to say, inertia with the persistence of a dull
vitality betrayed by the movements of the mouth-parts and antennae. I
am not, of course, invariably successful, for there is neither
delicacy nor precision in my poisoned needle and the wound which it
makes does not bear comparison with the tiny puncture of the unerring
natural sting; but, after all, it is repeated often enough to put the
object of my experiment beyond doubt. I should add that, to achieve
success, we must have a subject with a concentrated ganglionic
column, such as the Weevil, the Buprestis, the Dung-beetle and
others. Paralysis is then obtained with but a single prick, made at
the point which the Cerceris has revealed to us, the point at which
the corselet joins the rest of the thorax. In that case, the least
possible quantity of the acrid liquid is instilled, a quantity too
small to endanger the patient's life. With scattered nervous centres,
each requiring a separate operation, this method is impracticable:
the victim would die of the excess of corrosive fluid. I am quite
ashamed to have to recall these old experiments. Had they been
resumed and carried on by others of greater authority than I, we
should have escaped the objections of chemistry.

When light is so easy to obtain, why go in search of scientific
obscurity? Why talk of acid or alkaline reactions, which prove
nothing, when it is so simple to have recourse to facts, which prove
everything? Before declaring that the hunting insects' poison has
preservative properties merely because of its acid qualities, it
would have been well to enquire if the sting of a Bee, with its acid
and its alkali, could not perchance produce the same effects as that
of the paralyser, whose skill is categorically denied. The chemists
never gave this a thought.  Simplicity is not always welcome in our
laboratories. It is my duty to repair that little omission. I propose
to enquire if the poison of the Bee, the chief of the Apidae, is
suitable for a surgery that paralyses without killing.

The enquiry bristles with difficulties, though this is no reason for
abandoning it. First and foremost, I cannot possibly operate with the
Bee just as I catch her. Time after time I make the attempt, without
once succeeding; and patience becomes exhausted. The sting has to
penetrate at a definite point, exactly where the Wasp's sting would
have entered. My intractable captive tosses about angrily and stings
at random, never where I wish. My fingers get hurt even oftener than
the patient. I have only one means of gaining a little control over
the indomitable dart; and that is to cut off the Bee's abdomen with
my scissors, to seize the stump instantly with a fine forceps and to
apply the tip at the spot where the sting is to enter.

Everybody knows that the Bee's abdomen needs no orders from the head
to go on drawing its weapon for a few instants longer and to avenge
the deceased before being itself overcome with death's inertia. This
vindictive persistency serves me to perfection. There is another
circumstance in my favour: the barbed sting remains where it is,
which enables me to ascertain the exact spot pierced. A needle
withdrawn as soon as inserted would leave me doubtful. I can also,
when the transparency of the tissues permits, perceive the direction
of the weapon, whether perpendicular and favourable to my plans, or
slanting and therefore valueless. Those are the advantages.

The disadvantages are these: the amputated abdomen, though more
tractable than the entire Bee, is still far from satisfying my
wishes. It gives capricious starts and unexpected pricks. I want it
to sting here. No, it balks my forceps and goes and stings elsewhere:
not very far away, I admit; but it takes so little to miss the nerve-
centre which we wish to get at. I want it to go in perpendicularly.
No, in the great majority of cases it enters obliquely and passes
only through the epidermis. This is enough to show how many failures
are needed to make one success.

Nor is this all. I shall be telling nobody anything new when I recall
the fact that the Bee's sting is very painful. That of the hunting
insects, on the contrary, is in most cases insignificant. My skin,
which is no less sensitive than another's, pays no attention to it: I
handle Sphex, Ammophilae and Scoliae without heeding their lancet-
pricks. I have said this before; I remind the reader of it because of
the matter in hand. In the absence of well-known chemical or other
properties, we have really but one means of comparing the two
respective poisons; and that is the amount of pain produced. All the
rest is mystery. Besides, no poison, not even that of the
Rattlesnake, has hitherto revealed the cause of its dread effects.

Acting, therefore, under the instruction of that one guide, pain, I
place the Bee's sting far above that of the predatory insects as an
offensive weapon. A single one of its thrusts must equal and often
surpass in efficaciousness the repeated wounds of the other. For all
these reasons--an excessive display of energy; the variable quantity
of the virus inoculated by a wriggling abdomen which no longer
measures the emission by doses; a sting which I cannot direct as I
please; a wound which may be deep or superficial, the weapon entering
perpendicularly or obliquely, touching the nerve-centres or affecting
only the surrounding tissues--my experiments ought to produce the
most varied results.

I obtain, in fact, every possible kind of disorder: ataxy, temporary
disablement, permanent disablement, complete paralysis, partial
paralysis. Some of my stricken victims recover; others die after a
brief interval. It would be an unnecessary waste of space to record
in this volume my hundred and one attempts. The details would form
tedious reading and be of very little advantage, as in this sort of
study it is impossible to marshal one's facts with any regularity. I
will, therefore, sum them up in a few examples.

A colossal member of the Grasshopper tribe, the most powerful in my
district, Decticus verrucivorus (This Decticus has received its
specific name of verrucivorus, or Wart-eating, because it is employed
by the peasants in Sweden and elsewhere to bite off the warts on
their fingers.--Translator's Note.), is pricked at the base of the
neck, on the line of the fore-legs, at the median point. The prick
goes straight down. The spot is the same as that pierced by the sting
of the slayer of Crickets and Ephippigers. (A species of Green
Grasshopper. The Sphex paralyses Crickets and Grasshoppers to provide
food for her grubs. Cf. "Insect Life": chapters 6 to 12.--
Translator's Note.) The giantess, as soon as stung, kicks furiously,
flounders about, falls on her side and is unable to get up again. The
fore-legs are paralysed; the others are capable of moving. Lying
sideways, if not interfered with, the insect in a few moments gives
no signs of life beyond a fluttering of the antennae and palpi, a
pulsation of the abdomen and a convulsive uplifting of the
ovipositor; but, if irritated with a slight touch, it stirs its four
hind-legs, especially the third pair, those with the big thighs,
which kick vigorously. Next day, the condition is much the same, with
an aggravation of the paralysis, which has now attacked the middle-
legs. On the day after that, the legs do not move, but the antennae,
the palpi and the ovipositor continue to flutter actively. This is
the condition of the Ephippiger stabbed three times in the thorax by
the Languedocian Sphex. One point alone is missing, a most important
point: the long persistence of a remnant of life. In fact, on the
fourth day, the Decticus is dead; her dark colour tells me so.

There are two conclusions to be drawn from this experiment and it is
well to emphasise them. First, the Bee's poison is so active that a
single dagger-thrust aimed at a nervous centre kills in four days one
of the largest of the Orthoptera (An order of insects including the
Grasshoppers, Locusts, Cockroaches, Mantes and Earwigs, in addition
to the Stick- and Leaf-insects, Termites, Dragon-flies, May-flies,
Book-lice and others.--Translator's Note.), though an insect of
powerful constitution. Secondly, the paralysis at first affects only
the legs whose ganglion is attacked; next, it spreads slowly to the
second pair; lastly, it reaches the third. The local effect is
diffused. This diffusion, which might well take place in the victims
of the predatory insects, plays no part in the latters' method of
operation. The egg, which will be laid immediately afterwards,
demands the complete inertia of the prey from the outset. Hence all
the nerve-centres that govern locomotion must be numbed
instantaneously by the virus.

I can now understand why the poison of the predatory Wasps is
comparatively painless in its effects. If it possessed the strength
of that of the Bee, a single stab would impair the vitality of the
prey, while leaving it for some days capable of violent movements
that would be very dangerous to the huntress and especially to the
egg. More moderate in its action, it is instilled at the different
nervous centres, as is the case more particularly with the
caterpillars. (Caterpillars are the prey of the Ammophila, which
administers a separate stab to each of the several ganglia.--
Translator's Note.) In this way, the requisite immobility is obtained
at once; and, notwithstanding the number of wounds, the victim is not
a speedy corpse. To the marvels of the paralysers' talent we must add
one more: their wonderful poison, the strength of which is regulated
by delicate doses. The Bee revenging herself intensifies the
virulence of her poison; the Sphex putting her grubs' provender to
sleep weakens it, reduces it to what is strictly necessary.

One more instance of nearly the same kind. I prefer to take my
subjects from among the Orthoptera, which, owing to their imposing
size and the thinness of their skin at the points to be attacked,
lend themselves better than other insects to my delicate
manipulations. The armour of a Buprestis, the fat blubber of a
Rosechafer-grub, the contortions of a caterpillar present almost
insuperable obstacles to the success of a sting which it is not in my
power to direct. The insect which I now offer to the Bee's lancet is
the Great Green Grasshopper (Locusta viridissima), the adult female.
The prick is given in the median line of the fore-legs.

The effect is overwhelming. For two or three seconds the insect
writhes in convulsions and then falls on its side, motionless
throughout, save in the ovipositor and the antennae. Nothing stirs so
long as the creature is left alone; but, if I tickle it with a hair-
pencil, the four hind-legs move sharply and grip the point. As for
the fore-legs, smitten in their nerve-centre, they are quite
lifeless. The same condition is maintained for three days longer. On
the fifth day, the creeping paralysis leaves nothing free but the
antennae waving to and fro and the abdomen throbbing and lifting up
the ovipositor. On the sixth, the Grasshopper begins to turn brown;
she is dead. Except that the vestige of life is more persistent, the
case is the same as that of the Decticus. If we can prolong the
duration, we shall have the victim of the Sphex.

But first let us look into the effect of a prick administered
elsewhere than opposite the thoracic ganglia. I cause a female
Ephippiger to be stung in the abdomen, about the middle of the lower
surface. The patient does not seem to trouble greatly about her
wound: she clambers gallantly up the sides of the bell-jar under
which I have placed her; she goes on hopping as before. Better still,
she sets about browsing the vine-leaf which I have given her for her
consolation. A few hours pass and the whole thing is forgotten. She
has made a rapid and complete recovery.

A second is wounded in three places on the abdomen: in the middle and
on either side. On the first day, the insect seems to have felt
nothing; I see no sign of stiffness in its movements. No doubt it is
suffering acutely; but these stoics keep their troubles to
themselves. Next day, the Ephippiger drags her legs a little and
walks somewhat slowly. Two days more; and, when laid on her back, she
is unable to turn over. On the fifth day, she succumbs. This time, I
have exceeded the dose; the shock of receiving three stabs was too
much for her.

And so with the others, down to the sensitive Cricket, who, pricked
once in the abdomen, recovers in one day from the painful experience
and goes back to her lettuce-leaf. But, if the wound is repeated a
few times, death ensues within a more or less short period. I make an
exception, among those who pay tribute to my cruel curiosity, of the
Rosechafer-grubs, who defy three and four needle-thrusts. They will
collapse suddenly and lie outstretched, flabby and lifeless; and,
just when I am thinking them dead or paralysed, the hardy creatures
will recover consciousness, move along on their backs (This is the
usual mode of progression of the Cetonia- or Rosechafer-grub. Cf.
"The Life and Love of the Insect": chapter 11.--Translator's Note.),
bury themselves in the mould. I can obtain no precise information
from them. True, their thinly scattered cilia and their breastplate
of fat form a palisade and a rampart against the sting, which nearly
always enters only a little way and that obliquely.

Let us leave these unmanageable ones and keep to the Orthoperon,
which is more amenable to experiment. A dagger-thrust, we were
saying, kills it if directed upon the ganglia of the thorax; it
throws it into a transient state of discomfort if directed upon
another point. It is, therefore, by its direct action upon the
nervous centres that the poison reveals its formidable properties.

To generalize and say that death is always near at hand when the
sting is administered in the thoracic ganglia would be going too far:
it occurs frequently, but there are a good many exceptions, resulting
from circumstances impossible to define. I cannot control the
direction of the sting, the depth attained, the quantity of poison
shed; and the stump of the Bee is very far from making up for my
shortcomings. We have here not the cunning sword-play of the
predatory insect, but a casual blow, ill-placed and ill-regulated.
Any accident is possible, therefore, from the gravest to the mildest.
Let us mention some of the more interesting.

An adult Praying Mantis (Mantis religiosa, so-called because the
toothed fore-legs, in which it catches and kills its prey, adopt,
when folded, an attitude resembling that of prayer.--Translator's
Note.) is pricked level with the attachment of the predatory legs.
Had the wound been in the centre, I should have witnessed an
occurrence which, although I have seen it many times, still arouses
my liveliest emotion and surprise. This is the sudden paralysis of
the warrior's savage harpoons. No machinery stops more abruptly when
the mainspring breaks. As a rule, the inertia of the predatory legs
attacks the others in the course of a day or two; and the palsied one
dies in less than a week. But the present sting is not in the exact
centre. The dart has entered near the base of the right leg, at less
than a millimetre (.039 inch.--Translator's Note.) from the median
point. That leg is paralysed at once; the other is not; and the
insect employs it to the detriment of my unsuspecting fingers, which
are pricked to bleeding-point by the spike at the tip. Not until to-
morrow is the leg which wounded me to-day rendered motionless. This
time, the paralysis goes no farther. The Mantis moves along quite
well, with her corselet proudly raised, in her usual attitude; but
the predatory fore-arms, instead of being folded against the chest,
ready for attack, hang lifeless and open. I keep the cripple for
twelve days longer, during which she refuses all nourishment, being
incapable of using her tongs to seize the prey and lift it to her
mouth. The prolonged abstinence kills her.

Some suffer from locomotor ataxy. My notes recall an Ephippiger who,
pricked in the prothorax away from the median line, retained the use
of her six limbs without being able to walk or climb for lack of co-
ordination in her movements. A singular awkwardness left her wavering
between going back and going forward, between turning to the right
and turning to the left.

Some are smitten with semiparalysis. A Cetonia-grub, pricked away
from the centre on a level with the fore-legs, has her right side
flaccid, spread out, incapable of contracting, while the left side
swells, wrinkles and contracts. Since the left half no longer
receives the symmetrical cooperation of the right half, the grub,
instead of curling into the normal volute, closes its spiral on one
side and leaves it wide open on the other. The concentration of the
nervous apparatus, poisoned by the venom down one side of the body
only, a longitudinal half, explains this condition, which is the most
remarkable of all.

There is nothing to be gained by multiplying these examples. We have
seen pretty clearly the great variety of results produced by the
haphazard sting of a Bee's abdomen; let us now come to the crux of
the matter. Can the Bee's poison reduce the prey to the condition
required by the predatory Wasp? Yes, I have proved it by experiment;
but the proof calls for so much patience that it seemed to me to
suffice when obtained once for each species.  In such difficult
conditions, with a poison of excessive strength, a single success is
conclusive proof; the thing is possible so long as it occurs once.

A female Ephippiger is stung at the median point, just a little in
front of the fore-legs. Convulsive movements lasting for a few
seconds are followed by a fall to one side, with pulsations of the
abdomen, flutterings of the antennae and a few feeble movements of
the legs. The tarsi cling firmly to the hair-pencil which I hold out
to them. I place the insect on its back. It lies motionless. Its
state is absolutely the same as that to which the Languedocian Sphex
(Cf. "Insect Life": chapter 10.--Translator's Note.) reduces her
Ephippigers. For three weeks on end, I see repeated in all its
details the spectacle to which I have been accustomed in the victims
extracted from the burrows or taken from the huntress: the wide-open
mandibles, the quivering palpi and tarsi, the ovipositor shuddering
convulsively, the abdomen throbbing at long intervals, the spark of
life rekindled at the touch of a pencil. In the fourth week, these
signs of life, which have gradually weakened, disappear, but the
insect still remains irreproachably fresh. At last a month passes;
and the paralysed creature begins to turn brown. It is over; death
has come.

I have the same success with a Cricket and also with a Praying
Mantis. In all three cases, from the point of view of long-maintained
freshness and of the signs of life proved by slight movements, the
resemblance between my victim and those of the predatory insects is
so great that no Sphex and no Tachytes would have disowned the
product of my devices. My Cricket, my Ephippiger, my Mantis had the
same freshness as theirs; they preserved it as theirs did for a
period amply sufficient to allow of the grubs' complete evolution.
They proved to me, in the most conclusive manner, they prove to all
whom it may interest, that the poison of the Bees, leaving its
hideous violence on one side, does not differ in its effects from the
poison of the predatory Wasps. Are they alkaline or acid? The
question is an idle one in this connection. Both of them intoxicate,
derange, torpify the nervous centres and thus produce either death or
paralysis, according to the method of inoculation. For the moment,
that is all. No one is yet able to say the last word on the actions
of those poisons, so terrible in infinitesimal doses. But on the
point under discussion we need no longer be ignorant: the Wasp owes
the preservation of her grub's provisions not to any special
qualities of her poison but to the extreme precision of her surgery.

A last and more plausible objection is that raised by Darwin when he
said that there were no fossil remains of instincts. And, if there
were, O master, what would they teach us? Not very much more than
what we learn from the instincts of to-day. Does not the geologist
make the erstwhile carcases live anew in our minds in the light of
the world as we see it? With nothing but analogy to guide them, he
describes how some saurian lived in the jurassic age; there are no
fossil remains of habits, but nevertheless he can tell us plenty
about them, things worthy of credence, because the present teaches
him the past. Let us do a little as he does.

I will suppose a precursor of the Calicurgi (The Calicurgus, or
Pompilus, is a Hunting Wasp, feeding her larvae on Spiders. Cf. "The
Life and Love of the Insect": chapter 12.--Translator's Note.)
dwelling in the prehistoric coal-forests. Her prey was some hideous
Scorpion, that first-born of the Arachnida. How did the Hymenopteron
master the terrible prey? Analogy tells us, by the methods of the
present slayer of Tarantulae. It disarmed the adversary; it paralysed
the venomous sting by a stroke administered at a point which we could
determine for certain by the animal's anatomy.  Unless this was the
way it happened, the assailant must have perished, first stabbed and
then devoured by the prey. There is no getting away from it: either
the precursor of the Calicurgi, that slaughterer of Scorpions, knew
her trade thoroughly, or else the continuation of her race became
impossible, even as it would be impossible to keep up the race of the
Tarantula-killer without the dagger-thrust that paralyses the
Spider's poison-fangs. The first who, greatly daring, pinked the
Scorpion of the coal-seams was already an expert fencer; the first to
come to grips with the Tarantula had an unerring knowledge of her
dangerous surgery. The least hesitation, the slightest speculation;
and they were lost. The first teacher would also have been the last,
with no disciples to take up her work and perfect it.

But fossil instincts, they insist, would show us intermediary stages,
first, second and third rungs; they would show us the gradual passing
from the casual and very incorrect attempt to the perfect practice,
the fruit of the ages; with their accidental differences, they would
give us terms of comparison wherewith to trace matters from the
simple to the complex. Never mind about that, my masters: if you want
varied instincts in which to seek the source of the complex by means
of the simple, it is not necessary to search the foliations of the
coal-seams and the successive layers of the rocks, those archives of
the prehistoric world; the present day affords to contemplation an
inexhaustible treasury realizing perhaps everything that can emerge
from the limbo of possibility. In what will soon be half a century of
study, I have caught but a tiny glimpse of a very tiny corner of the
realm of instinct; and the harvest gathered overwhelms me with its
variety: I do not yet know two species of predatory Wasps whose
methods are exactly the same.

One gives a single stroke of the dagger, a second two, a third three,
a fourth nine or ten. One stabs here and the other there; and neither
is imitated by the next, who attacks elsewhere. This one injures the
cephalic centres and produces death; that one respects them and
produces paralysis. Some squeeze the cervical ganglia to obtain a
temporary torpor; others know nothing of the effects of compressing
the brain. A few make the prey disgorge, lest its honey should poison
the offspring; the majority do not resort to preventive
manipulations. Here are some that first disarm the foe, who carries
poisoned daggers; yonder are others and more numerous, who have no
precautions to take before murdering the unarmed prey. In the
preliminary struggle, I know some who grab their victims by the neck,
by the rostrum, by the antennae, by the caudal threads; I know some
who throw them on their backs, some who lift them breast to breast,
some who operate on them in the vertical position, some who attack
them lengthwise and crosswise, some who climb on their backs or on
their abdomens, some who press on their backs to force out a pectoral
fissure, some who open their desperately contracted coil, using the
tip of the abdomen as a wedge. And so I could go on indefinitely:
every method of fencing is employed.  What could I not also say about
the egg, slung pendulum-fashion by a thread from the ceiling, when
the live provisions are wriggling underneath; laid on a scanty
mouthful, a solitary opening dish, when the dead prey requires
renewing from day to-day; entrusted to the last joint stored away,
when the victuals are paralysed; fixed at a precise spot, entailing
the least danger to the consumer and the game, when the corpulent
prey has to be devoured with a special art that warrants its
freshness!

Well, how can this multitude of varied instincts teach us anything
about gradual transformation? Will the one and only dagger-thrust of
the Cerceris and the Scolia take us to the two thrusts of the
Calicurgus, to the three thrusts of the Sphex, to the manifold thrust
of the Ammophila? Yes, if we consider only numerical progression. One
and one are two; two and one are three: so run the figures. But is
this what we want to know? What has arithmetic to do with the case?
Is not the whole problem subordinate to a condition that cannot be
translated into cyphers? As the prey changes, the anatomy changes;
and the surgeon always operates with a complete understanding of his
subject. The single dagger-thrust is administered to ganglia
collected into a common cluster; the manifold thrusts are distributed
over the scattered ganglia; of the two thrusts of the Tarantula-
huntress, one disarms and the other paralyses. And so with the
others: that is to say, the instinct is directed each time by the
secrets of the nervous organism. There is a perfect harmony between
the operation and the patient's anatomy.

The single stroke of the Scolia is no less wonderful than the
repeated strokes of the Ammophila. Each has her appointed game and
each slays it by a method as rational as any that our own science
could invent. In the presence of this consummate knowledge, which
leaves us utterly confounded, what a poor argument is that of 1 + 1 =
2! And what is that progress by units to us? The universe is mirrored
in a drop of water; universal logic flashes into sight in a single
sting.

Besides, push on the pitiful argument. One leads to two, two lead to
three. Granted without dispute. And then? We will accept the Scolia
as the pioneer, the foundress of the first principles of the art.
The simplicity of her method justifies our supposition. She learns
her trade in some way or other, by accident; she knows supremely well
how to paralyse her Cetonia-grub with a single dagger-thrust driven
into the thorax. One day, through some fortuitous circumstance, or
rather by mistake, she takes it into her head to strike two blows. As
one is enough for the Cetonia, the repetition was of no value unless
there was a change of prey. What was the new victim submitted to the
butcher's knife? Apparently, a large Spider, since the Tarantula and
the Garden Spider call for two thrusts. And the prentice Scolia, who
used at first to sting under the throat, had the skill, at her first
attempt, to begin by disarming her adversary and then to go quite low
down, almost to the end of the thorax, to strike the vital point. I
am utterly incredulous as to her success. I see her eaten up if her
lancet swerves and hits the wrong spot. Let us look impossibility
boldly in the face and admit that she succeeds. I then see the
offspring, which have no recollection of the fortunate event save
through the belly--and then we are postulating that the digestion of
the carnivorous larva leaves a trace in the memory of the honey-
sipping insect--I see the offspring, I say, obliged to wait at long
intervals for that inspired double thrust and obliged to succeed each
time under pain of death for them and their descendants. To accept
this host of impossibilities exceeds all my faculties of belief. One
leads to two, no doubt; the Ssingle blow of the predatory Wasp will
never lead to the blow twice delivered.

In order to live, we all require the conditions that enable us to
live: this is a truth worthy of the famous axioms of La Palice.
(Jacques de Chabannes, Seigneur de La Palice (circa 1470-1525), was a
French captain killed at the battle of Pavia. His soldiers made up in
his honour a ballad, two lines of which, translated, run:

Fifteen minutes before he died,
He was still alive.

Hence the French expression, une verite de La Palice, meaning an
obvious truth.--Translator's Note.)

The predatory insects live by their talent.  If they do not possess
it to perfection, their race is lost. Hidden in the murk of the past
ages, the argument based upon the non-existence of fossil instinct is
no better able than the others to withstand the light of living
realities; it crumbles under the stroke of fate; it vanishes before a
La Palice platitude.


CHAPTER 12. THE HALICTI: A PARASITE.

Do you know the Halicti? Perhaps not. There is no great harm done: it
is quite possible to enjoy the few sweets of existence without
knowing the Halicti. Nevertheless, when questioned persistently,
these humble creatures with no history can tell us some very singular
things; and their acquaintance is not to be disdained if we would
enlarge our ideas upon the bewildering swarm of this world. Since we
have nothing better to do, let us look into the Halicti. They are
worth the trouble.

How shall we recognize them? They are manufacturers of honey,
generally longer and slighter than the Bee of our hives. They
constitute a numerous group that varies greatly in size and
colouring. Some there are that exceed the dimensions of the Common
Wasp; others might be compared with the House-fly, or are even
smaller. In the midst of this variety, which is the despair of the
novice, one characteristic remains invariable. Every Halictus carries
the clearly-written certificate of her guild.

Examine the last ring, at the tip of the abdomen, on the dorsal
surface. If your capture be an Halictus, there will be here a smooth
and shiny line, a narrow groove along which the sting slides up and
down when the insect is on the defensive. This slide for the
unsheathed weapon denotes some member of the Halictus tribe, without
distinction of size or colour. No elsewhere, in the sting-bearing
order, is this original sort of groove in use. It is the distinctive
mark, the emblem of the family.

Three Halicti will appear before you in this biographical fragment.
Two of them are my neighbours, my familiars, who rarely fail to
settle each year in the best parts of the enclosure. They occupied
the ground before I did; and I should not dream of evicting them,
persuaded as I am that they will well repay my indulgence. Their
proximity, which allows me to visit them daily at my leisure, is a
piece of good luck. Let us profit by it.

At the head of my three subjects is the Zebra Halictus (H. zebrus,
WALCK.), which is beautifully belted around her long abdomen with
alternate black and pale-russet scarves. Her slender shape, her size,
which equals that of the Common Wasp, her simple and pretty dress,
combine to make her the chief representative of the genus here.

She establishes her galleries in firm soil, where there is no danger
of landslips which would interfere with the work at nesting-time. In
my garden, the well-levelled paths, made of a mixture of tiny pebbles
and red clayey earth, suits her to perfection. Every spring she takes
possession of it, never alone, but in gangs whose number varies
greatly, amounting sometimes to as many as a hundred. In this way she
founds what may be described as small townships, each clearly marked
out and distant from the other, in which the joint possession of the
site in no way entails joint work.

Each has her home, an inviolable manor which none but the owner has
the right to enter. A sound buffeting would soon call to order any
adventuress who dared to make her way into another's dwelling. No
such indiscretion is suffered among the Halicti. Let each keep to her
own place and to herself and perfect peace will reign in this new-
formed society, made up of neighbours and not of fellow-workers.

Operations begin in April, most unobtrusively, the only sign of the
underground works being the little mounds of fresh earth. There is no
animation in the building-yards. The labourers show themselves very
seldom, so busy are they at the bottom of their pits. At moments,
here and there, the summit of a tiny mole-hill begins to totter and
tumbles down the slopes of the cone: it is a worker coming up with
her armful of rubbish and shooting it outside, without showing
herself in the open. Nothing more for the moment.

There is one precaution to be taken: the villages must be protected
against the passers-by, who might inadvertently trample them under
foot. I surround each of them with a palisade of reed-stumps. In the
centre I plant a danger-signal, a post with a paper flag. The
sections of the paths thus marked are forbidden ground; none of the
household will walk upon them.

May arrives, gay with flowers and sunshine. The navvies of April have
turned themselves into harvesters. At every moment I see them
settling, all befloured with yellow, atop of the mole-hills now
turned into craters. Let us first look into the question of the
house. The arrangement of the home will give us some useful
information. A spade and a three-pronged fork place the insect's
crypts before our eyes.

A shaft as nearly vertical as possible, straight or winding according
to the exigencies of a soil rich in flinty remains, descends to a
depth of between eight and twelve inches. As it is merely a passage
in which the only thing necessary is that the Halictus should find an
easy support in coming and going, this long entrance-hall is rough
and uneven.  A regular shape and a polished surface would be out of
place here. These artistic refinements are reserved for the
apartments of her young. All that the Halictus mother asks is that
the passage should be easy to go up and down, to ascend or descend in
a hurry. And so she leaves it rugged. Its width is about that of a
thick lead-pencil.

Arranged one by one, horizontally and at different heights, the cells
occupy the basement of the house. They are oval cavities, three-
quarters of an inch long, dug out of the clay mass. They end in a
short bottle-neck that widens into a graceful mouth.  They look like
tiny vaccine-phials laid on their sides. All of them open into the
passage.

The inside of these little cells has the gloss and polish of a stucco
which our most experienced plasterers might envy. It is diapered with
faint longitudinal, diamond-shaped marks. These are the traces of the
polishing-tool that has given the last finish to the work.  What can
this polisher be? None other than the tongue, that is obvious. The
Halictus has made a trowel of her tongue and licked the wall daintily
and methodically in order to polish it.

This final glazing, so exquisite in its perfection, is preceded by a
trimming-process. In the cells that are not yet stocked with
provisions, the walls are dotted with tiny dents like those in a
thimble. Here we recognize the work of the mandibles, which squeeze
the clay with their tips, compress it and purge it of any grains of
sand. The result is a milled surface whereon the polished layer will
find a solid adhesive base. This layer is obtained with a fine clay,
very carefully selected by the insect, purified, softened and then
applied atom by atom, after which the trowel of the tongue steps in,
diapering and polishing, while saliva, disgorged as needed, gives
pliancy to the paste and finally dries into a waterproof varnish.

The humidity of the subsoil, at the time of the spring showers, would
reduce the little earthen alcove to a sort of pap. The coating of
saliva is an excellent preservative against this danger. It is so
delicate that we suspect rather than see it; but its efficacy is none
the less evident. I fill a cell with water. The liquid remains in it
quite well, without any trace of infiltration.

The tiny pitcher looks as if it were varnished with galenite. The
impermeability which the potter obtains by the brutal infusion of his
mineral ingredients the Halictus achieves with the soft polisher of
her tongue moistened with saliva. Thus protected, the larva will
enjoy all the advantages of a dry berth, even in rain-soaked ground.

Should the wish seize us, it is easy to detach the waterproof film,
at least in shreds. Take the little shapeless lump in which a cell
has been excavated and put it in sufficient water to cover the bottom
of it. The whole earthy mass will soon be soaked and reduced to a mud
which we are able to sweep with the point of a hair-pencil. Let us
have patience and do our sweeping gently; and we shall be able to
separate from the main body the fragments of a sort of extremely fine
satin. This transparent, colourless material is the upholstery that
keeps out the wet. The Spider's web, if it formed a stuff and not a
net, is the only thing that could be compared with it.

The Halictus' nurseries are, as we see, structures that take much
time in the making. The insect first digs in the clayey earth a
recess with an oval curve to it.  It has its mandibles for a pick-axe
and its tarsi, armed with tiny claws, for rakes. Rough though it be,
this early work presents difficulties, for the Bee has to do her
excavating in a narrow gully, where there is only just room for her
to pass.

The rubbish soon becomes cumbersome. The insect collects it and then,
moving backwards, with its fore-legs closed over the load, it hoists
it up through the shaft and flings it outside, upon the mole-hill,
which rises by so much above the threshold of the burrow. Next come
the dainty finishing-touches: the milling of the wall, the
application of a glaze of better-quality clay, the assiduous
polishing with the long-suffering tongue, the waterproof coating and
the jarlike mouth, a masterpiece of pottery in which the stopping-
plug will be fixed when the time comes for locking the door of the
room. And all this has to be done with mathematical precision.

No, because of this perfection, the grubs' chambers could never be
work done casually from day to day, as the ripe eggs descend from the
ovaries. They are prepared long beforehand, during the bad weather,
at the end of March and in April, when flowers are scarce and the
temperature subject to sudden changes. This thankless period, often
cold, liable to hail-storms, is spent in making ready the home. Alone
at the bottom of her shaft, which she rarely leaves, the mother works
at her children's apartments, lavishing upon them those finishing-
touches which leisure allows. They are completed, or very nearly,
when May comes with the radiant sunshine and wealth of flowers.

We see the evidence of these long preparations in the burrows
themselves, if we inspect them before the provisions are brought. All
of them show us cells, about a dozen in number, quite finished, but
still empty. To begin by getting all the huts built is a sensible
precaution: the mother will not have to turn aside from the delicate
task of harvesting and egg-laying in order to perform rough navvy's
work.

Everything is ready by May. The air is balmy; the smiling lawns are
gay with a thousand little flowers, dandelions, rock-roses, tansies
and daisies, among which the harvesting Bee rolls gleefully, covering
herself with pollen. With her crop full of honey and the brushes of
her legs befloured, the Halictus returns to her village. Flying very
low, almost level with the ground, she hesitates, with sudden turns
and bewildered movements. It seems that the weak-sighted insect finds
its way with difficulty among the cottages of its little township.

Which is its mole-hill among the many others near, all similar in
appearance?  It cannot tell exactly save by the sign-board of certain
details known to itself alone. Therefore, still on the wing, tacking
from side to side, it examines the locality. The home is found at
last: the Halictus alights on the threshold of her abode and dives
into it quickly.

What happens at the bottom of the pit must be the same thing that
happens in the case of the other Wild Bees. The harvester enters a
cell backwards; she first brushes herself and drops her load of
pollen; then, turning round, she disgorges the honey in her crop upon
the floury mass. This done, the unwearied one leaves the burrow and
flies away, back to the flowers. After many journeys, the stack of
provisions in the cell is sufficient. This is the moment to bake the
cake.

The mother kneads her flour, mingles it sparingly with honey. The
mixture is made into a round loaf, the size of a pea. Unlike our own
loaves, this one has the crust inside and the crumb outside. The
middle part of the roll, the ration which will be consumed last, when
the grub has acquired some strength, consists of almost nothing but
dry pollen. The Bee keeps the dainties in her crop for the outside of
the loaf, whence the feeble grub-worm is to take its first mouthfuls.
Here it is all soft crumb, a delicious sandwich with plenty of honey.
The little breakfast-roll is arranged in rings regulated according to
the age of the nurseling: first the syrupy outside and at the very
end the dry inside. Thus it is ordained by the economics of the
Halictus.

An egg bent like a bow is laid upon the sphere. According to the
generally-accepted rule, it now only remains to close the cabin.
Honey-gatherers--Anthophorae, Osmiae, Mason-bees and many others--
usually first collect a sufficient stock of food and then, having
laid the egg, shut up the cell, to which they need pay no more
attention. The Halicti employ a different method. The compartments,
each with its round loaf and its egg--the tenant and his provisions--
are not closed up. As they all open into the common passage of the
burrow, the mother is able, without leaving her other occupations, to
inspect them daily and enquire tenderly into the progress of her
family. I imagine, without possessing any certain proof, that from
time to time she distributes additional provisions to the grubs, for
the original loaf appears to me a very frugal ration compared with
that served by the other Bees.

Certain hunting Hymenoptera, the Bembex-wasps, for instance, are
accustomed to furnish the provisions in instalments: so that the grub
may have fresh though dead game, they fill the platter each day. The
Halictus mother has not these domestic necessities, as her provisions
keep more easily; but still she might well distribute a second
portion of flour to the larvae, when their appetite attains its
height. I can see nothing else to explain the open doors of the cells
during the feeding-period.

At last the grubs, close-watched and fed to repletion, have achieved
the requisite degree of fatness; they are on the eve of being
transformed into pupae. Then and not till then the cells are closed:
a big clay stopper is built by the mother into the spreading mouth of
the jug. Henceforth the maternal cares are over. The rest will come
of itself.

Hitherto we have witnessed only the peaceful details of the
housekeeping. Let us go back a little and we shall be witnesses of
rampant brigandage. In May, I visit my most populous village daily,
at about ten o'clock in the morning, when the victualling-operations
are in full swing. Seated on a low chair in the sun, with my back
bent and my arms upon my knees, I watch, without moving, until
dinner-time. What attracts me is a parasite, a trumpery Gnat, the
bold despoiler of the Halictus.

Has the jade a name? I trust so, without, however, caring to waste my
time in enquiries that can have no interest for the reader. Facts
clearly stated are preferable to the dry minutiae of nomenclature.
Let me content myself with giving a brief description of the culprit.
She is a Dipteron, or Fly, five millimetres long. (.195 inch.--
Translator's Note.) Eyes, dark-red; face, white. Corselet, pearl-
grey, with five rows of fine black dots, which are the roots of stiff
bristles pointing backwards. Greyish belly, pale below. Black legs.

She abounds in the colony under observation. Crouching in the sun,
near a burrow, she waits. As soon as the Halictus arrives from her
harvesting, her legs yellow with pollen, the Gnat darts forth and
pursues her, keeping behind her in all the turns of her oscillating
flight. At last, the Bee suddenly dives indoors. No less suddenly the
other settles on the mole-hill, quite close to the entrance.
Motionless, with her head turned towards the door of the house, she
waits for the Bee to finish her business. The latter reappears at
last and, for a few seconds, stands on the threshold, with her head
and thorax outside the hole. The Gnat, on her side, does not stir.

Often, they are face to face, separated by a space no wider than a
finger's breadth. Neither of them shows the least excitement. The
Halictus--judging, at least, by her tranquillity--takes no notice of
the parasite lying in wait for her; the parasite, on the other hand,
displays no fear of being punished for her audacity. She remains
imperturbable, she, the dwarf, in the presence of the colossus who
could crush her with one blow.

In vain I watch anxiously for some sign of apprehension on either
side: nothing in the Halictus points to a knowledge of the danger run
by her family; nor does the Gnat betray any dread of swift
retribution. Plunderer and plundered stare at each other for a
moment; and that is all.

If she liked, the amiable giantess could rip up with her claw the
tiny bandit who ruins her home; she could crunch her with her
mandibles, run her through with her stiletto. She does nothing of the
sort, but leaves the robber in peace, to sit quite close, motionless,
with her red eyes fixed on the threshold of the house.  Why this
fatuous clemency?

The Bee flies off. Forthwith, the Gnat walks in, with no more
ceremony than if she were entering her own place. She now chooses
among the victualled cells at her ease, for they are all open, as I
have said; she leisurely deposits her eggs. No one will disturb her
until the Bee's return. To flour one's legs with pollen, to distend
one's crop with syrup is a task that takes long a-doing; and the
intruder, therefore, has time and to spare wherein to commit her
felony. Moreover, her chronometer is well-regulated and gives the
exact measure of the Bee's length of absence. When the Halictus comes
back from the fields, the Gnat has decamped. In some favourable spot,
not far from the burrow, she awaits the opportunity for a fresh
misdeed.

What would happen if a parasite were surprised at her work by the
Bee? Nothing serious. I see them, greatly daring, follow the Halictus
right into the cave and remain there for some time while the mixture
of pollen and honey is being prepared. Unable to make use of the
paste so long as the harvester is kneading it, they go back to the
open air and wait on the threshold for the Bee to come out. They
return to the sunlight, calmly, with unhurried steps: a clear proof
that nothing untoward has occurred in the depths where the Halictus
works.

A tap on the Gnat's neck, if she become too enterprising in the
neighbourhood of the cake: that is all that the lady of the house
seems to allow herself, to drive away the intruder. There is no
serious affray between the robber and the robbed. This is apparent
from the self-possessed manner and undamaged condition of the dwarf
who returns from visiting the giantess engaged down in the burrow.

The Bee, when she comes home, whether laden with provisions or not,
hesitates, as I have said, for a while; in a series of rapid zigzags,
she moves backwards, forwards and from side to side, at a short
distance from the ground. This intricate flight at first suggests the
idea that she is trying to lead her persecutress astray by means of
an inextricable tangle of marches and countermarches. That would
certainly be a prudent move on the Bee's part; but so much wisdom
appears to be denied her.

It is not the enemy that is disturbing her, but rather the difficulty
of finding her own house amid the confusion of the mole-hills,
encroaching one upon the other, and all the alleys of the little
township, which, owing to landslips of fresh rubbish, alter in
appearance from one day to the next. Her hesitation is manifest, for
she often blunders and alights at the entrance to a burrow that is
not hers. The mistake is at once perceived from the slight
indications of the doorway.

The search is resumed with the same see-sawing flights, mingled with
sudden excursions to a distance. At last, the burrow is recognized.
The Halictus dives into it with a rush; but, however prompt her
disappearance underground, the Gnat is there, perched on the
threshold with her eyes turned to the entrance, waiting for the Bee
to come out, so that she may visit the honey-jars in her turn.

When the owner of the house ascends, the other draws back a little,
just enough to leave a free passage and no more. Why should she put
herself out? the meeting is so peaceful that, short of further
information, one would not suspect that a destroyer and destroyed
were face to face. Far from being intimidated by the sudden arrival
of the Halictus, the Gnat pays hardly any attention; and, in the same
way, the Halictus takes no notice of her persecutress, unless the
bandit pursue her and worry her on the wing. Then, with a sudden
bend, the Bee makes off.

Even so do Philanthus apivorus (The Bee-hunting Wasp. Cf. "Social
Life in the Insect World": chapter 13.--Translator's Note.) and the
other game-hunters behave when the Tachina is at their heels seeking
the chance to lay her egg on the morsel about to be stored away.
Without jostling the parasite which they find hanging around the
burrow, they go indoors quite peaceably; but, on the wing, perceiving
her after them, they dart off wildly. The Tachina, however, dares not
go down to the cells where the huntress stacks her provisions; she
prudently waits at the door for the Philanthus to arrive. The crime,
the laying of the egg, is committed at the very moment when the
victim is about to vanish underground.

The troubles of the parasite of the Halictus are of quite another
kind. The homing Bee has her honey in her crop and her pollen on her
leg-brushes: the first is inaccessible to the thief; the second is
powdery and would give no resting-place to the egg. Besides, there is
not enough of it yet: to collect the wherewithal for that round loaf
of hers, the Bee will have to make repeated journeys. When the
necessary amount is obtained, she will knead it with the tip of her
mandibles and shape it with her feet into a little ball. The Gnat's
egg, were it present among the materials, would certainly be in
danger during this manipulation.

The alien egg, therefore, must be laid on the finished bread; and, as
the preparation takes place underground, the parasite is needs
obliged to go down to the Halictus. With inconceivable daring, she
does go down, even when the Bee is there. Whether through cowardice
or silly indulgence, the dispossessed insect lets the other have its
way.

The object of the Gnat, with her tenacious lying-in-wait and her
reckless burglaries, is not to feed herself at the harvester's
expense: she could get her living out of the flowers with much less
trouble than her thieving trade involves. The most, I think, that she
can allow herself to do in the Halictus' cellars is to take one
morsel just to ascertain the quality of the victuals. Her great, her
sole business is to settle her family. The stolen goods are not for
herself, but for her offspring.

Let us dig up the pollen-loaves. We shall find them most often
crumbled with no regard to economy, simply frittered away. We shall
see two or three maggots, with pointed mouths, moving in the yellow
flour scattered over the floor of the cell. These are the Gnat's
progeny.  With them we sometimes find the lawful owner, the grub-worm
of the Halictus, but stunted and emaciated with fasting. His
gluttonous companions, without otherwise molesting him, deprive him
of the best of everything. The wretched starveling dwindles, shrivels
up and soon disappears from view. His corpse, a mere atom, blended
with the remaining provisions, supplies the maggots with one mouthful
the more.

And what does the Halictus mother do in this disaster? She is free to
visit her grubs at any moment; she has but to put her head into the
passage of the house: she cannot fail to be apprised of their
distress. The squandered loaf, the swarming mass of vermin tell their
own tale. Why does she not take the intruders by the skin of the
abdomen? To grind them to powder with her mandibles, to fling them
out of doors were the business of a second. And the foolish creature
never thinks of it, leaves the ravagers in peace!

She does worse. When the time of the nymphosis comes, the Halictus
mother goes to the cells rifled by the parasite and closes them with
an earthen plug as carefully as she does the rest. This final
barricade, an excellent precaution when the cot is occupied by an
Halictus in course of metamorphosis, becomes the height of absurdity
when the Gnat has passed that way. Instinct does not hesitate in the
face of this ineptitude: it seals up emptiness. I say, emptiness,
because the crafty maggot hastens to decamp the instant that the
victuals are consumed, as though it foresaw an insuperable obstacle
for the coming Fly: it quits the cell before the Bee closes it.

To rascally guile the parasite adds prudence. All, until there is
none of them left, abandon the clay homes which would be their
undoing once the entrance was plugged up. The earthen niche, so
grateful to the tender skin, thanks to its polished coating, so free
from humidity, thanks to its waterproof glaze, ought, one would
think, to make an excellent waiting-place. The maggots will have none
of it. Lest they should find themselves walled in when they become
frail Gnats, they go away and disperse in the neighbourhood of the
ascending shaft.

My digging operations, in fact, always reveal the pupae outside the
cells, never inside. I find them enshrined, one by one, in the body
of the clayey earth, in a narrow recess which the emigrant worm has
contrived to make for itself. Next spring, when the hour comes for
leaving, the adult insect has but to creep through the rubbish, which
is easy work.

Another and no less imperative reason compels this change of abode on
the parasite's part. In July, a second generation of the Halictus is
procreated. The Gnat, reduced on her side to a single brood, remains
in the pupa state and awaits the spring of the following year before
effecting her transformation. The honey-gather resumes her work in
her native village; she avails herself of the pits and cells
constructed in the spring, saving no little time thereby. The whole
elaborate structure has remained in good condition. It needs but a
few repairs to make the old house habitable.

Now what would happen if the Bee, so scrupulous in matters of
cleanliness, were to find a pupa in the cell which she is sweeping?
She would treat the cumbersome object as she would a piece of old
plaster. It would be no more to her than any other refuse, a bit of
gravel, which, seized with the mandibles, crushed perhaps, would be
sent to join the rubbish-heap outside. Once removed from the soil and
exposed to the inclemencies of the weather, the pupa would inevitably
perish.

I admire this intelligent foresight of the maggot, which forgoes the
comfort of the moment for the security of the future. Two dangers
threaten it: to be immured in a casket whence the Fly can never
issue; or else to die out of doors, in the unkindly air, when the Bee
sweeps out the restored cells. To avoid this twofold peril, it
decamps before the door is closed, before the July Halictus sets her
house in order.

Let us now see what comes of the parasite's intrusion. In the course
of June, when peace is established in the Halictus' home, I dig up my
largest village, comprising some fifty burrows in all. None of the
sorrows of this underworld shall escape me. There are four of us
engaged in sifting the excavated earth through our fingers. What one
has examined another takes up and examines; and then another and
another yet. The returns are heartrending. We do not succeed in
finding one single nymph of the Halictus. The whole of the populous
city has perished; and its place has been taken by the Gnat. There is
a glut of that individual's pupae. I collect them in order to trace
their evolution.

The year runs its course; and the little russet kegs, into which the
original maggots have hardened and contracted, remain stationary.
They are seeds endowed with latent life. The heats of July do not
rouse them from their torpor. In that month, the period of the second
generation of the Halictus, there is a sort of truce of God: the
parasite rests and the Bee works in peace. If hostilities were to be
resumed straight away, as murderous in summer as they were in spring,
the progeny of the Halictus, too cruelly smitten, might possibly
disappear altogether. This lull readjusts the balance.

In April, when the Zebra Halictus, in search of a good place for her
burrows, roams up and down the garden paths with her oscillating
flight, the parasite, on its side, hastens to hatch. Oh, the precise
and terrible agreement between those two calendars, the calendar of
the persecutor and the persecuted! At the very moment when the Bee
comes out, here is the Gnat: she is ready to begin her deadly
starving-process all over again.

Were this an isolated case, one's mind would not dwell upon it: an
Halictus more or less in the world makes little difference in the
general balance. But, alas, brigandage in all its forms is the rule
in the eternal conflict of living things! From the lowest to the
highest, every producer is exploited by the unproductive. Man
himself, whose exceptional rank ought to raise him above such
baseness, excels in this ravening lust. He says to himself that
business means getting hold of other people's cash, even as the Gnat
says to herself that business means getting hold of the Halictus'
honey. And, to play the brigand to better purpose, he invents war,
the art of killing wholesale and of doing with glory that which, when
done on a smaller scale, leads to the gallows.

Shall we never behold the realization of that sublime vision which is
sung on Sundays in the smallest village-church: Gloria in excelsis
Deo, et in terra pax hominibus bonae voluntatis! If war affected
humanity alone, perhaps the future would have peace in store for us,
seeing that generous minds are working for it with might and main;
but the scourge also rages among the lower animals, which in their
obstinate way, will never listen to reason. Once the evil is laid
down as a general condition, it perhaps becomes incurable. Life in
the future, it is to be feared, will be what it is to-day, a
perpetual massacre.

Whereupon, by a desperate effort of the imagination, one pictures to
oneself a giant capable of juggling with the planets. He is
irresistible strength; he is also law and justice. He knows of our
battles, our butcheries, our farm-burnings, our town-burnings, our
brutal triumphs; he knows our explosives, our shells, our torpedo-
boats, our ironclads and all our cunning engines of destruction; he
knows as well the appalling extent of the appetites among all
creatures, down to the very lowest. Well, if that just and mighty one
held the earth under his thumb, would he hesitate whether he ought to
crush it?

He would not hesitate...He would let things take their course. He
would say to himself:

'The old belief is right; the earth is a rotten apple, gnawed by the
vermin of evil. It is a first crude attempt, a step towards a
kindlier destiny. Let it be: order and justice are waiting at the
end.'


CHAPTER 13. THE HALICTI: THE PORTRESS.

Leaving our village is no very serious matter when we are children.
We even look on it as a sort of holiday. We are going to see
something new, those magic pictures of our dreams. With age come
regrets; and the close of life is spent in stirring up old memories.
Then the beloved village reappears, in the biograph of the mind,
embellished, transfigured by the glow of those first impressions; and
the mental image, superior to the reality, stands out in amazingly
clear relief. The past, the far-off past, was only yesterday; we see
it, we touch it.

For my part, after three-quarters of a century, I could walk with my
eyes closed straight to the flat stone where I first heard the soft
chiming note of the Midwife Toad; yes, I should find it to a
certainty, if time, which devastates all things, even the homes of
Toads, has not moved it or perhaps left it in ruins.

I see, on the margin of the brook, the exact position of the alder-
trees whose tangled roots, deep under the water, were a refuge for
the Crayfish. I should say:

'It is just at the foot of that tree that I had the unutterable bliss
of catching a beauty. She had horns so long...and enormous claws,
full of meat, for I got her just at the right time.'

I should go without faltering to the ash under whose shade my heart
beat so loudly one sunny spring morning. I had caught sight of a sort
of white, cottony ball among the branches. Peeping from the depths of
the wadding was an anxious little head with a red hood to it. O what
unparalleled luck!  It was a Goldfinch, sitting on her eggs.

Compared with a find like this, lesser events do not count. Let us
leave them. In any case, they pale before the memory of the paternal
garden, a tiny hanging garden of some thirty paces by ten, situated
right at the top of the village. The only spot that overlooks it is a
little esplanade on which stands the old castle (The Chateau de
Saint-Leons standing just outside and above the village of Saint-
Leons, where the author was born in 1823. Cf. "The Life of the Fly":
chapters 6 and 7.--Translator's Note.) with the four turrets that
have now become dovecotes. A steep path takes you up to this open
space. From my house on, it is more like a precipice than a slope.
Gardens buttressed by walls are staged in terraces on the sides of
the funnel-shaped valley. Ours is the highest; it is also the
smallest.

There are no trees. Even a solitary apple-tree would crowd it. There
is a patch of cabbages, with a border of sorrel, a patch of turnips
and another of lettuces. That is all we have in the way of garden-
stuff; there is no room for more. Against the upper supporting-wall,
facing due south, is a vine-arbour which, at intervals, when the sun
is generous, provides half a basketful of white muscatel grapes.
These are a luxury of our own, greatly envied by the neighbours, for
the vine is unknown outside this corner, the warmest in the village.

A hedge of currant-bushes, the only safeguard against a terrible
fall, forms a parapet above the next terrace. When our parents'
watchful eyes are off us, we lie flat on our stomachs, my brother and
I, and look into the abyss at the foot of the wall bulging under the
thrust of the land. It is the garden of monsieur le notaire.

There are beds with box-borders in that garden; there are pear-trees
reputed to give pears, real pears, more or less good to eat when they
have ripened on the straw all through the late autumn.  In our
imagination, it is a spot of perpetual delight, a paradise, but a
paradise seen the wrong way up: instead of contemplating it from
below, we gaze at it from above. How happy they must be with so much
space and all those pears!

We look at the hives, around which the hovering Bees make a sort of
russet smoke. They stand under the shelter of a great hazel. The tree
has sprung up all of itself in a fissure of the wall, almost on the
level of our currant-bushes. While it spreads its mighty branches
over the notary's hives, its roots, at least, are on our land. It
belongs to us. The trouble is to gather the nuts.

I creep along astride the strong branches projecting horizontally
into space. If I slip or if the support breaks, I shall come to grief
in the midst of the angry Bees. I do not slip and the support does
not break. With the bent switch which my brother hands me, I bring
the finest clusters within my reach. I soon fill my pockets. Moving
backwards, still straddling my branch, I recover terra firma. O
wondrous days of litheness and assurance, when, for a few filberts,
on a perilous perch we braved the abyss!

Enough. These reminiscences, so dear to my dreams, do not interest
the reader. Why stir up more of them? I am content to have brought
this fact into prominence: the first glimmers of light penetrating
into the dark chambers of the mind leave an indelible impression,
which the years make fresher instead of dimmer.

Obscured by everyday worries, the present is much less familiar to
us, in its petty details, than the past, with childhood's glow upon
it. I see plainly in my memory what my prentice eyes saw; and I
should never succeed in reproducing with the same accuracy what I saw
last week. I know my village thoroughly, though I quitted it so long
ago; and I know hardly anything of the towns to which the
vicissitudes of life have brought me. An exquisitely sweet link binds
us to our native soil; we are like the plant that has to be torn away
from the spot where it put out its first roots. Poor though it be, I
should love to see my own village again; I should like to leave my
bones there.

Does the insect in its turn receive a lasting impression of its
earliest visions? Has it pleasant memories of its first surroundings?
We will not speak of the majority, a world of wandering gipsies who
establish themselves anywhere provided that certain conditions be
fulfilled; but the others, the settlers, living in groups: do they
recall their native village? Have they, like ourselves, a special
affection for the place which saw their birth?

Yes, indeed they have: they remember, they recognize the maternal
abode, they come back to it, they restore it, they colonize it anew.
Among many other instances, let us quote that of the Zebra Halictus.
She will show us a splendid example of love for one's birthplace
translating itself into deeds.

The Halictus' spring family acquire the adult form in a couple of
months or so; they leave the cells about the end of June. What goes
on inside these neophytes as they cross the threshold of the burrow
for the first time? Something, apparently, that may be compared with
our own impressions of childhood. An exact and indelible image is
stamped on their virgin memories. Despite the years, I still see the
stone whence came the resonant notes of the little Toads, the parapet
of currant-bushes, the notary's garden of Eden. These trifles make
the best part of my life. The Halictus sees in the same way the blade
of grass whereon she rested in her first flight, the bit of gravel
which her claw touched in her first climb to the top of the shaft.
She knows her native abode by heart just as I know my village. The
locality has become familiar to her in one glad, sunny morning.

She flies off, seeks refreshment on the flowers near at hand and
visits the fields where the coming harvests will be gathered. The
distance does not lead her astray, so faithful are her impressions of
her first trip; she finds the encampment of her tribe; among the
burrows of the village, so numerous and so closely resembling one
another, she knows her own. It is the house where she was born, the
beloved house with its unforgettable memories.

But, on returning home, the Halictus is not the only mistress of the
house. The dwelling dug by the solitary Bee in early spring remains,
when summer comes, the joint inheritance of the members of the
family. There are ten cells, or thereabouts, underground. Now from
these cells there have issued none but females. This is the rule
among the three species of Halicti that concern us now and probably
also among many others, if not all. They have two generations in each
year. The spring one consists of females only; the summer one
comprises both males and females, in almost equal numbers. We shall
return to this curious subject in our next chapter.

The household, therefore, if not reduced by accidents, above all if
not starved by the usurping Gnat, would consist of half-a-score of
sisters, none but sisters, all equally industrious and all capable of
procreating without a nuptial partner. On the other hand, the
maternal dwelling is no hovel; far from it: the entrance-gallery, the
principal room of the house, will serve quite well, after a few odds
and ends of refuse have been swept away. This will be so much gained
in time, ever precious to the Bee. The cells at the bottom, the clay
cabins, are also nearly intact. To make use of them, it will be
enough for the Halictus to polish up the stucco with her tongue.

Well, which of the survivors, all equally entitled to the succession,
will inherit the house? There are six of them, seven, or more,
according to the chances of mortality. To whose share will the
maternal dwelling fall?

There is no quarrel between the interested parties. The mansion is
recognized as common property without dispute. The sisters come and
go peacefully through the same door, attend to their business, pass
and let the others pass. Down at the bottom of the pit, each has her
little demesne, her group of cells dug at the cost of fresh toil,
when the old ones, now insufficient in number, are occupied. In these
recesses, which are private estates, each mother works by herself,
jealous of her property and of her privacy. Every elsewhere, traffic
is free to all.

The exits and entrances in the working fortress provide a spectacle
of the highest interest. A harvester arrives from the fields, the
feather-brushes of her legs powdered with pollen. If the door be
open, the Bee at once dives underground. To tarry on the threshold
would mean waste of time; and the business is urgent. Sometimes,
several appear upon the scene at almost the same moment. The passage
is too narrow for two, especially when they have to avoid any
untimely contact that would make the floury burden fall to the floor.
The nearest to the opening enters quickly. The others, drawn up on
the threshold in order of their arrival, respectful of one another's
rights, await their turn. As soon as the first disappears, the second
follows after her and is herself swiftly followed by the third and
then the others, one by one.

Sometimes, again, there is a meeting between a Bee about to come out
and a Bee about to go in. Then the latter draws back a little and
makes way for the former. The politeness is reciprocal. I see some
who, when on the point of emerging from the pit, go down again and
leave the passage free for the one who has just arrived. Thanks to
this mutual spirit of accommodation, the business of the house
proceeds without impediment.

Let us keep our eyes open. There is something better than the well-
preserved order of the entrances. When an Halictus appears, returning
from her round of the flowers, we see a sort of trap-door, which
closed the house, suddenly fall and give a free passage. As soon as
the new arrival has entered, the trap rises back into its place,
almost level with the ground, and closes the entrance anew. The same
thing happens when the insects go out. At a request from within, the
trap descends, the door opens and the Bee flies away. The outlet is
closed forthwith.

What can this valve be which, descending or ascending in the cylinder
of the pit, after the fashion of a piston, opens and closes the house
at each departure and at each arrival? It is an Halictus, who has
become the portress of the establishment. With her large head, she
makes an impassable barrier at the top of the entrance-hall. If any
one belonging to the house wants to go in or out, she 'pulls the
cord,' that is to say, she withdraws to a spot where the gallery
becomes wider and leaves room for two. The other passes. She then at
once returns to the orifice and blocks it with the top of her head.
Motionless, ever on the look-out, she does not leave her post save to
drive away importunate visitors.

Let us profit by her brief appearances outside to take a look at her.
We recognize in her an Halictus similar to the others, which are now
busy harvesting; but the top of her head is bald and her dress is
dingy and thread-bare. All the nap is gone; and one can hardly make
out the handsome stripes of red and brown which she used to have.
These tattered, work-worn garments make things clear to us.

This Bee who mounts guard and performs the office of a portress at
the entrance to the burrow is older than the others. She is the
foundress of the establishment, the mother of the actual workers, the
grandmother of the present grubs. In the springtime of her life,
three months ago, she wore herself out in solitary labours. Now that
her ovaries are dried up, she takes a well-earned rest. No, rest is
hardly the word. She still works, she assists the household to the
best of her power. Incapable of being a mother for a second time, she
becomes a portress, opens the door to the members of her family and
makes strangers keep their distance.

The suspicious Kid (In La Fontaine's fable, "Le Loup, la Chevre et le
Chevreau."--Translator's Note.), looking through the chink, said to
the Wolf:

'Show me a white foot, or I shan't open the door.'

No less suspicious, the grandmother says to each comer:

'Show me the yellow foot of an Halictus, or you won't be let in.'

None is admitted to the dwelling unless she be recognized as a member
of the family.

See for yourselves. Near the burrow passes an Ant, an unscrupulous
adventuress, who would not be sorry to know the meaning of the
honeyed fragrance that rises from the bottom of the cellar.

"Be off, or you'll catch it!'says the portress, wagging her neck.

As a rule the threat suffices. The Ant decamps. Should she insist,
the watcher leaves her sentry-box, flings herself upon the saucy
jade, buffets her and drives her away. The moment the punishment has
been administered, she returns to her post.

Next comes the turn of a Leaf-cutter (Megachile albocincta, PEREZ),
which, unskilled in the art of burrowing, utilizes, after the manner
of her kin, the old galleries dug by others. Those of the Zebra
Halictus suit her very well, when the terrible Gnat has left them
vacant for lack of heirs.  Seeking for a home wherein to stack her
robinia-leaf honey-pots, she often makes a flying inspection of my
colonies of Halicti. A burrow seems to take her fancy; but, before
she sets foot on earth, her buzzing is noticed by the sentry, who
suddenly darts out and makes a few gestures on the threshold of her
door. That is all. The Leaf-cutter has understood. She moves on.

Sometimes, the Megachile has time to alight and insert her head into
the mouth of the pit. In a moment, the portress is there, comes a
little higher and bars the way. Follows a not very serious contest.
The stranger quickly recognizes the rights of the first occupant and,
without insisting, goes to seek an abode elsewhere.

An accomplished marauder (Caelioxys caudata, SPIN.), a parasite of
the Megachile, receives a sound drubbing under my eyes. She thought,
the feather-brain, that she was entering the Leaf-Cutter's
establishment! She soon finds out her mistake; she meets the door-
keeping Halictus, who administers a sharp correction. She makes off
at full speed. And so with the others which, through inadvertence or
ambition, seek to enter the burrow.

The same intolerance exists among the different grandmothers. About
the middle of July, when the animation of the colony is at its
height, two sets of Halicti are easily distinguishable: the young
mothers and the old. The former, much more numerous, brisk of
movement and smartly arrayed, come and go unceasingly from the
burrows to the fields and from the fields to the burrows. The latter,
faded and dispirited, wander idly from hole to hole. They look as
though they had lost their way and were incapable of finding their
homes. Who are these vagabonds? I see in them afflicted ones bereft
of a family through the act of the odious Gnat. Many burrows have
been altogether exterminated. At the awakening of summer, the mother
found herself alone. She left her empty house and went off in search
of a dwelling where there were cradles to defend, a guard to mount.
But those fortunate nests already have their overseer, the foundress,
who, jealous of her rights, gives her unemployed neighbour a cold
reception. One sentry is enough; two would merely block the narrow
guard-room.

I am privileged at times to witness a fight between two grandmothers.
When the tramp in quest of employment appears outside the door, the
lawful occupant does not move from her post, does not withdraw into
the passage, as she would before an Halictus returning from the
fields. Far from making way, she threatens the intruder with her feet
and mandibles. The other retaliates and tries to force her way in
notwithstanding. Blows are exchanged. The fray ends by the defeat of
the stranger, who goes off to pick a quarrel elsewhere.

These little scenes afford us a glimpse of certain details of the
highest interest in the habits of the Zebra Halictus. The mother who
builds her nest in the spring no longer leaves her home, once her
works are finished. Shut up at the bottom of the burrow, busied with
the thousand cares of housekeeping, or else drowsing, she waits for
her daughters to come out. When, in the summer heats, the life of the
village recommences, having nought to do outside as a harvester, she
stands sentry at the entrance to the hall, so as to let none in save
the workers of the home, her own daughters. She wards off evilly-
disposed visitors. None can enter without the door-keeper's consent.

There is nothing to tell us that the watcher ever deserts her post.
Not once do I see her leave her house to go and seek some refreshment
from the flowers. Her age and her sedentary occupation, which
involves no great fatigue, perhaps relieve her of the need of
nourishment. Perhaps, also, the young ones returning from their
plundering may from time to time disgorge a drop of the contents of
their crops for her benefit. Fed or unfed, the old one no longer goes
out.

But what she does need is the joys of an active family. Many are
deprived of these. The Gnat's burglary has destroyed the busy
household. The sorely-tried Bees abandon the deserted burrow. It is
they who, ragged and careworn, wander through the village. When they
move, their flight is only a short one; more often they remain
motionless. It is they who, soured in their tempers, attack their
fellows and seek to dislodge them. They grow rarer and more languid
from day to day; then they disappear for good. What has become of
them? The little Grey Lizard had his eye on them: they are easily
snapped up.

Those settled in their own demesne, those who guard the honey-factory
wherein their daughters, the heiresses of the maternal establishment,
are at work, display wonderful vigilance. The more I see of them, the
more I admire them. In the cool hours of the early morning, when the
pollen-flour is not sufficiently ripened by the sun and while the
harvesters are still indoors, I see them at their posts, at the top
of the gallery. Here, motionless, their heads flush with the earth,
they bar the door to all invaders. If I look at them closely, they
retreat a little and, in the shadow, await the indiscreet observer's
departure.

I return when the harvesting is in full swing, between eight o'clock
and twelve. There is now, as the Halicti go in or out, a succession
of prompt withdrawals to open the door and of ascents to close it.
The portress is in the full exercise of her functions.

In the afternoon, the heat is too great and the workers do not go to
the fields.  Retiring to the bottom of the house, they varnish the
new cells, they make the round loaf that is to receive the egg. The
grandmother is still upstairs, stopping the door with her bald head.
For her, there is no siesta during the stifling hours: the safety of
the household requires her to forgo it.

I come back again at nightfall, or even later.  By the light of a
lantern, I again behold the overseer, as zealous and assiduous as in
the day-time. The others are resting, but not she, for fear,
apparently, of nocturnal dangers known to herself alone. Does she
nevertheless end by descending to the quiet of the floor below? It
seems probable, so essential must rest be, after the fatigue of such
a vigil!

It is evident that, guarded in this manner, the burrow is exempt from
calamities similar to those which, too often, depopulate it in May.
Let the Gnat come now, if she dare, to steal the Halictus' loaves!
Let her lie in wait as long as she will! Neither her audacity nor her
slyness will make her escape the lynx eyes of the sentinel, who will
put her to flight with a threatening gesture or, if she persist,
crush her with her nippers. She will not come; and we know the
reason: until spring returns, she is underground in the pupa state.

But, in her absence, there is no lack, among the Fly rabble, of other
batteners on the toil of their fellow insects. Whatever the job,
whatever the plunder, you will find parasites there. And yet, for all
my daily visits, I never catch one of these in the neighbourhood of
the summer burrows. How cleverly the rascals ply their trade! How
well aware are they of the guard who keeps watch at the Halictus'
door! There is no foul deed possible nowadays; and the result is that
no Fly puts in an appearance and the tribulations of last spring are
not repeated.

The grandmother who, dispensed by age from maternal bothers, mounts
guard at the entrance of the home and watches over the safety of the
family, tells us that in the genesis of the instincts sudden births
occur; she shows us the existence of a spontaneous aptitude which
nothing, either in her own past conduct or in the actions of her
daughters, could have led us to suspect. Timorous in her prime, in
the month of May, when she lived alone in the burrow of her making,
she has become gifted, in her decline, with a superb contempt of
danger and dares in her impotence what she never dared do in her
strength.

Formerly, when her tyrant, the Gnat, entered the house in her
presence, or, more often, stood face to face with her at the
entrance, the silly Bee did not stir, did not even threaten the red-
eyed bandit, the dwarf whose doom she could so easily have sealed.
Was it terror on her part?  No, for she attended to her duties with
her usual punctiliousness; no, for the strong do not allow themselves
to be thus paralysed by the weak. It was ignorance of the danger, it
was sheer fecklessness.

And behold, to-day, the ignoramus of three months ago knows the
peril, knows it well, without serving any apprenticeship. Every
stranger who appears is kept at a distance, without distinction of
size or race. If the threatening gesture be not enough, the keeper
sallies forth and flings herself upon the persistent one. Cowardice
has developed into courage.

How has this change been brought about? I should like to picture the
Halictus gaining wisdom from the misfortunes of the spring and
capable thenceforth of looking out for danger; I would gladly credit
her with having learnt in the stern school of experience the
advantages of a patrol. I must give up the idea. If, by dint of
gradual little acts of progress, the Bee has achieved the glorious
invention of a janitress, how comes it that the fear of thieves is
intermittent? It is true that, being by herself in May, she cannot
stand permanently at her door: the business of the house takes
precedence of everything else. But she ought, at any rate as soon as
her offspring are victimized, to know the parasite and give chase
when, at every moment, she finds her almost under her feet and even
in her house. Yet she pays no attention to her.

The bitter experience of her ancestors, therefore, has bequeathed
nothing to her of a nature to alter her placid character; nor have
her own tribulations aught to do with the sudden awakening of her
vigilance in July. Like ourselves, animals have their joys and their
sorrows. They eagerly make the most of the former; they fret but
little about the latter, which, when all is said, is the best way of
achieving a purely animal enjoyment of life. To mitigate these
troubles and protect the progeny there is the inspiration of
instinct, which is able without the counsels of experience to give
the Halicti a portress.

When the victualling is finished, when the Halicti no longer sally
forth on harvesting intent nor return all befloured with their
spoils, the old Bee is still at her post, vigilant as ever. The final
preparations for the brood are made below; the cells are closed. The
door will be kept until everything is finished. Then grandmother and
mothers leave the house. Exhausted by the performance of their duty,
they go, somewhere or other, to die.

In September appears the second generation, comprising both males and
females. I find both sexes wassailing on the flowers, especially the
Compositae, the centauries and thistles. They are not harvesting now:
they are refreshing themselves, holding high holiday, teasing one
another. It is the wedding-time. Yet another fortnight and the males
will disappear, henceforth useless. The part of the idlers is played.
Only the industrious ones remain, the impregnated females, who go
through the winter and set to work in April.

I do not know their exact haunt during the inclement season. I
expected them to return to their native burrow, an excellent dwelling
for the winter, one would think. Excavations made in January showed
me my mistake. The old homes are empty, are falling to pieces owing
to the prolonged effect of the rains. The Zebra Halictus has
something better than these muddy hovels: she has snug corners in the
stone-heaps, hiding-places in the sunny walls and many other
convenient habitations. And so the natives of a village become
scattered far and wide.

In April, the scattered ones reassemble from all directions. On the
well-flattened garden-paths a choice is made of the site for their
common labours. Operations soon begin. Close to the first who bores
her shaft there is soon a second one busy with hers; a third arrives,
followed by another and others yet, until the little mounds often
touch one another, while at times they number as many as fifty on a
surface of less than a square yard.

One would be inclined, at first sight, to say that these groups are
accounted for by the insect's recollection of its birthplace, by the
fact that the villagers, after dispersing during the winter, return
to their hamlet. But it is not thus that things happen: the Halictus
scorns to-day the place that once suited her. I never see her occupy
the same patch of ground for two years in succession. Each spring she
needs new quarters. And there are plenty of them.

Can this mustering of the Halicti be due to a wish to resume the old
intercourse with their friends and relations? Do the natives of the
same burrow, of the same hamlet, recognize one another? Are they
inclined to do their work among themselves rather than in the company
of strangers? There is nothing to prove it, nor is there anything to
disprove it. Either for this reason or for others, the Halictus likes
to keep with her neighbours.

This propensity is pretty frequent among peace-lovers, who, needing
little nourishment, have no cause to fear competition. The others,
the big eaters, take possession of estates, of hunting-grounds from
which their fellows are excluded. Ask a Wolf his opinion of a brother
Wolf poaching on his preserves. Man himself, the chief of consumers,
makes for himself frontiers armed with artillery; he sets up posts at
the foot of which one says to the other:

'Here's my side, there's yours. That's enough: now we'll pepper each
other.'

And the rattle of the latest explosives ends the colloquy.

Happy are the peace-lovers. What do they gain by their mustering?
With them it is not a defensive system, a concerted effort to ward
off the common foe. The Halictus does not care about her neighbour's
affairs. She does not visit another's burrow; she does not allow
others to visit hers. She has her tribulations, which she endures
alone; she is indifferent to the tribulations of her kind. She stands
aloof from the strife of her fellows. Let each mind her own business
and leave things at that.

But company has its attractions. He lives twice who watches the life
of others. Individual activity gains by the sight of the general
activity; the animation of each one derives fresh warmth from the
fire of the universal animation. To see one's neighbours at work
stimulates one's rivalry. And work is the great delight, the real
satisfaction that gives some value to life. The Halictus knows this
well and assembles in her numbers that she may work all the better.

Sometimes she assembles in such multitudes and over such extents of
ground as to suggest our own colossal swarms. Babylon and Memphis,
Rome and Carthage, London and Paris, those frantic hives, occur to
our mind if we can manage to forget comparative dimensions and see a
Cyclopean pile in a pinch of earth.

It was in February. The almond-tree was in blossom. A sudden rush of
sap had given the tree new life; its boughs, all black and desolate,
seemingly dead, were becoming a glorious dome of snowy satin. I have
always loved this magic of the awakening spring, this smile of the
first flowers against the gloomy bareness of the bark.

And so I was walking across the fields, gazing at the almond-trees'
carnival. Others were before me. An Osmia in a black velvet bodice
and a red woollen skirt, the Horned Osmia, was visiting the flowers,
dipping into each pink eye in search of a honeyed tear. A very small
and very modestly-dressed Halictus, much busier and in far greater
numbers, was flitting silently from blossom to blossom. Official
science calls her Halictus malachurus, K. The pretty little Bee's
godfather strikes me as ill-inspired. What has malachurus, calling
attention to the softness of the rump, to do in this connection? The
name of Early Halictus would better describe the almond-tree's little
visitor.

None of the melliferous clan, in my neighbourhood at least, is
stirring as early as she is. She digs her burrows in February, an
inclement month, subject to sudden returns of frost. When none as
yet, even among her near kinswomen, dares to sally forth from winter-
quarters, she pluckily goes to work, shine the sun ever so little.
Like the Zebra Halictus, she has two generations a year, one in
spring and one in summer; like her, too, she settles by preference in
the hard ruts of the country roads.

Her mole-hills, those humble mounds any two of which would go easily
into a Hen's egg, rise innumerous in my path, the path by the almond-
trees which is the happy hunting-ground of my curiosity to-day. This
path is a ribbon of road three paces wide, worn into ruts by the
Mule's hoofs and the wheels of the farm-carts. A coppice of holm-oaks
shelters it from the north wind. In this Eden with its well-caked
soil, its warmth and quiet, the little Halictus has multiplied her
mole-hills to such a degree that I cannot take a step without
crushing some of them. The accident is not serious: the miner, safe
underground, will be able to scramble up the crumbling sides of the
mine and repair the threshold of the trampled home.

I make a point of measuring the density of the population. I count
from forty to sixty mole-hills on a surface of one square yard. The
encampment is three paces wide and stretches over nearly three-
quarters of a mile. How many Halicti are there in this Babylon? I do
not venture to make the calculation.

Speaking of the Zebra Halictus, I used the words hamlet, village,
township; and the expressions were appropriate. Here the term city
hardly meets the case. And what reason can we allege for these
innumerable clusters? I can see but one: the charm of living
together, which is the origin of society. Like mingles with like,
without the rendering of any mutual service; and this is enough to
summon the Early Halictus to the same way-side, even as the Herring
and the Sardine assemble in the same waters.


CHAPTER 14. THE HALICTI: PARTHENOGENESIS.

The Halictus opens up another question, connected with one of life's
obscurest problems. Let us go back five-and-twenty years. I am living
at Orange. My house stands alone among the fields. On the other side
of the wall enclosing our yard, which faces due south, is a narrow
path overgrown with couch-grass. The sun beats full upon it; and the
glare reflected from the whitewash of the wall turns it into a little
tropical corner, shut off from the rude gusts of the north-west wind.

Here the Cats come to take their afternoon nap, with their eyes half-
closed; here the children come, with Bull, the House-dog; here also
come the haymakers, at the hottest time of the day, to sit and take
their meal and whet their scythes in the shade of the plane-tree;
here the women pass up and down with their rakes, after the hay-
harvest, to glean what they can on the niggardly carpet of the shorn
meadow. It is therefore a very much frequented footpath, were it only
because of the coming and going of our household: a thoroughfare ill-
suited, one would think, to the peaceful operations of a Bee; and
nevertheless it is such a very warm and sheltered spot and the soil
is so favourable that every year I see the Cylindrical Halictus (H.
cylindricus, FAB.) hand down the site from one generation to the
next. It is true that the very matutinal, even partly nocturnal
character of the work makes the insect suffer less inconvenience from
the traffic.

The burrows cover an extent of some ten square yards, and their
mounds, which often come near enough to touch, average a distance of
four inches at the most from one another. Their number is therefore
something like a thousand. The ground just here is very rough,
consisting of stones and dust mixed with a little mould and held
together by the closely interwoven roots of the couch-grass. But,
owing to its nature, it is thoroughly well drained, a condition
always in request among Bees and Wasps that have underground cells.

Let us forget for a moment what the Zebra Halictus and the Early
Halictus have taught us. At the risk of repeating myself a little, I
will relate what I observed during my first investigations. The
Cylindrical Halictus works in May. Except among the social species,
such as Common Wasps, Bumble-bees, Ants and Hive-bees, it is the rule
for each insect that victuals its nests either with honey or game to
work by itself at constructing the home of its grubs. Among insects
of the same species there is often neighbourship; but their labours
are individual and not the result of co-operation. For instance, the
Cricket-hunters, the Yellow-winged Sphex, settle in gangs at the foot
of a sandstone cliff, but each digs her own burrow and would not
suffer a neighbour to come and help in piercing the home.

In the case of the Anthophorae, an innumerable swarm takes possession
of a sun-scorched crag, each Bee digging her own gallery and
jealously excluding any of her fellows who might venture to come to
the entrance of her hole. The Three-pronged Osmia, when boring the
bramble-stalk tunnel in which her cells are to be stacked, gives a
warm reception to any Osmia that dares set foot upon her property.

Let one of the Odyneri who make their homes in a road-side bank
mistake the door and enter her neighbour's house: she would have a
bad time of it! Let a Megachile, returning with her leafy disk in her
legs, go into the wrong basement: she would be very soon dislodged!
So with the others: each has her own home, which none of the others
has the right to enter. This is the rule, even among Bees and Wasps
established in a populous colony on a common site. Close
neighbourhood implies no sort of intimate relationship.

Great therefore is my surprise as I watch the Cylindrical Halictus'
operations. She forms no society, in the entomological sense of the
word: there is no common family; and the general interest does not
engross the attention of the individual. Each mother occupies herself
only with her own eggs, builds cells and gathers honey only for her
own larvae, without concerning herself in any way with the upbringing
of the others' grubs. All that they have in common is the entrance-
door and the goods-passage, which ramifies in the ground and leads to
different groups of cells, each the property of one mother. Even so,
in the blocks of flats in our large towns, one door, one hall and one
staircase lead to different floors or different portions of a floor
where each family retains its isolation and its independence.

This common right of way is extremely easy to perceive at the time
for victualling the nests. Let us direct our attention for a while to
the same entrance-aperture, opening at the top of a little mound of
earth freshly thrown up, like that accumulated by the Ants during
their works. Sooner or later we shall see the Halicti arrive with
their load of pollen, gathered on the Cichoriaceae of the
neighbourhood.

Usually, they come up one by one; but it is not rare to see three,
four or even more appearing at the same time at the mouth of one
burrow. They perch on the top of the mound and, without hurrying in
front of one another, with no sign of jealousy, they dive down the
passage, each in her turn. We need but watch their peaceful waiting,
their tranquil dives, to recognize that this indeed is a common
passage to which each has as much right as another.

When the soil is exploited for the first time and the shaft sunk
slowly from the outside to the inside, do several Cylindrical
Halicti, one relieving the other, take part in the work by which they
will afterwards profit equally? I do not believe it for a moment. As
the Zebra Halictus and the Early Halictus told me later, each miner
goes to work alone and makes herself a gallery which will be her
exclusive property. The common use of the passage comes presently,
when the site, tested by experience, is handed down from one
generation to another.

A first group of cells is established, we will suppose, at the bottom
of a pit dug in virgin soil. The whole thing, cells and pit, is the
work of one insect. When the moment comes to leave the underground
dwelling, the Bees emerging from this nest will find before them an
open road, or one at most obstructed by crumbly matter, which offers
less resistance than the neighbouring soil, as yet untouched. The
exit-way will therefore be the primitive way, contrived by the mother
during the construction of the nest. All enter upon it without any
hesitation, for the cells open straight on it. All, coming and going
from the cells to the bottom of the shaft and from the shaft to the
cells, will take part in the clearing, under the stimulus of the
approaching deliverance.

It is quite unnecessary here to presume among these underground
prisoners a concerted effort to liberate themselves more easily by
working in common: each is thinking only of herself and invariably
returns, after resting, to toil at the inevitable path, the path of
least resistance, in short the passage once dug by the mother and now
more or less blocked up.

Among the Cylindrical Halicti, any one who wishes emerges from her
cell at her own hour, without waiting for the emergence of the
others, because the cells, grouped in small stacks, have each their
special outlet opening into the common gallery. The result of this
arrangement is that all the inhabitants of one burrow are able to
assist, each doing her share, in the clearing of the exit-shaft. When
she feels fatigued, the worker retires to her undamaged cell and
another succeeds her, impatient to get out rather than to help the
first. At last the way is clear and the Halicti emerge. They disperse
over the flowers around as long as the sun is hot; when the air
cools, they go back to the burrows to spend the night there.

A few days pass and already the cares of egg-laying are at hand. The
galleries have never been abandoned. The Bees have come to take
refuge there on rainy or very windy days; most, if not all, have
returned every evening at sunset, each doubtless making for her own
cell, which is still intact and which is carefully impressed upon her
memory. In a word, the Cylindrical Halictus does not lead a wandering
life; she has a fixed residence.

A necessary consequence results from these settled habits: for the
purpose of her laying, the Bee will adopt the identical burrow in
which she was born. The entrance-gallery is ready therefore. Should
it need to be carried deeper, to be pushed in new directions, the
builder has but to extend it at will. The old cells even can serve
again, if slightly restored.

Thus resuming possession of the native burrow in view of her
offspring, the Bee, notwithstanding her instincts as a solitary
worker, achieves an attempt at social life, because there is one
entrance-door and one passage for the use of all the mothers
returning to the original domicile. There is thus a semblance of
collaboration without any real co-operation for the common weal.
Everything is reduced to a family inheritance shared equally among
the heirs.

The number of these coheirs must soon be limited, for a too
tumultuous traffic in the corridor would delay the work. Then fresh
passages are opened inwards, often communicating with depths already
excavated, so that the ground at last is perforated in every
direction with an inextricable maze of winding tunnels.

The digging of the cells and the piercing of new galleries take place
especially at night. A cone of fresh earth on top of the burrow bears
evidence every morning to the overnight activity. It also shows by
its volume that several navvies have taken part in the work, for it
would be impossible for a single Halictus to extract from the ground,
convey to the surface and heap up so large a stack of rubbish in so
short a time.

At sunrise, when the fields around are still wet with dew, the
Cylindrical Halictus leaves her underground passages and starts on
her foraging. This is done without animation, perhaps because of the
morning coolness. There is no joyous excitement, no humming above the
burrows. The Bees come back again, flying low, silently and heavily,
their hind-legs yellow with pollen; they alight on the earth-cone and
at once dive down the vertical chimney. Others come up the pipe and
go off to their harvesting.

This journeying to and fro for provisions continues until eight or
nine in the morning. Then the heat begins to grow intense and is
reflected by the wall; then also the path is once more frequented.
People pass at every moment, coming out of the house or elsewhence.
The soil is so much trodden under foot that the little mounds of
refuse surrounding each burrow soon disappear and the site loses
every sign of underground habitation.

All day long, the Halicti remain indoors. Withdrawing to the bottom
of the galleries, they occupy themselves probably in making and
polishing the cells. Next morning, new cones of rubbish appear, the
result of the night's work, and the pollen-harvest is resumed for a
few hours; then everything ceases again. And so the work goes on,
suspended by day, renewed at night and in the morning hours, until
completely finished.

The passages of the Cylindrical Halictus descend to a depth of some
eight inches and branch into secondary corridors, each giving access
to a set of cells. These number six or eight to each set and are
ranged side by side, parallel with their main axis, which is almost
horizontal. They are oval at the base and contracted at the neck.
Their length is nearly twenty millimetres (.78 inch.--Translator's
Note.) and their greatest width eight. (.312 inch.--Translator's
Note.) They do not consist simply of a cavity in the ground; on the
contrary, they have their own walls, so that the group can be taken
out in one piece, with a little precaution, and removed neatly from
the earth in which it is contained.

The walls are formed of fairly delicate materials, which must have
been chosen in the coarse surrounding mass and kneaded with saliva.
The inside is carefully polished and upholstered with a thin
waterproof film. We will cut short these details concerning the
cells, which the Zebra Halictus has already shown us in greater
perfection, leave the home to itself and come to the most striking
feature in the life-history of the Halicti.

The Cylindrical Halictus is at work in the first days of May. It is a
rule among the Hymenoptera for the males never to take part in the
fatiguing work of nest-building. To construct cells and to amass
victuals are occupations entirely foreign to their nature. This rule
seems to have no exceptions; and the Halicti conform to it like the
rest. It is therefore only to be expected that we should see no males
shooting the underground rubbish outside the galleries. That is not
their business.

But what does astonish us, when our attention is directed to it, is
the total absence of any males in the vicinity of the burrows.
Although it is the rule that the males should be idle, it is also the
rule for these idlers to keep near the galleries in course of
construction, coming and going from door to door and hovering above
the work-yards to seize the moment at which the unfecundated females
will at last yield to their importunities.

Now here, despite the enormous population, despite my careful and
incessant watch, it is impossible for me to distinguish a single
male. And yet the distinction between the sexes is of the simplest.
It is not necessary to take hold of the male. He can be recognized
even at a distance by his slenderer frame, by his long, narrow
abdomen, by his red sash. They might easily suggest two different
species. The female is a pale russet-brown; the male is black, with a
few red segments to his abdomen. Well, during the May building-
operations, there is not a Bee in sight clad in black, with a
slender, red-belted abdomen; in short, not a male.

Though the males do not come to visit the environs of the burrows,
they might be elsewhere, particularly on the flowers where the
females go plundering. I did not fail to explore the fields, insect-
net in hand. My search was invariably fruitless. On the other hand,
those males, now nowhere to be found, are plentiful later, in
September, along the borders of the paths, on the close-set flowers
of the eringo.

This singular colony, reduced exclusively to mothers, made me suspect
the existence of several generations a year, whereof one at least
must possess the other sex. I continued therefore, when the building-
who was over, to keep a daily watch on the establishment of the
Cylindrical Halictus, in order to seize the favourable moment that
would verify my suspicions. For six weeks, solitude reigned above the
burrows: not a single Halictus appeared; and the path, trodden by the
wayfarers, lost its little heaps of rubbish, the only signs of the
excavations. There was nothing outside to show that the warmth down
below was hatching populous swarms.

July comes and already a few little mounds of fresh earth betoken
work going on underground in preparation for an exodus in the near
future. As the males, among the Hymenoptera, are generally further
advanced than the females and quit their natal cells earlier, it was
important that I should witness the first exits made, so as to dispel
the least shadow of a doubt. A violent exhumation would have a great
advantage over the natural exit: it would place the population of the
burrows immediately under my eyes, before the departure of either
sex. In this way, nothing could escape from me and I was dispensed
from a watch which, for all its attentiveness, was not to be relied
upon absolutely. I therefore resolve upon a reconnaissance with the
spade.

I dig down to the full depth of the galleries and remove large lumps
of earth which I take in my hands and break very carefully so as to
examine all the parts that may contain cells. Halicti in the perfect
state predominate, most of them still lodged in their unbroken
chambers. Though they are not quite so numerous, there are also
plenty of pupae. I collect them of every shade of colour, from dead-
white, the sign of a recent transformation, to smoky-brown, the mark
of an approaching metamorphosis. Larvae, in small quantities,
complete the harvest. They are in the state of torpor that precedes
the appearance of the pupa.

I prepare boxes with a bed of fresh, sifted earth to receive the
larvae and the pupae, which I lodge each in a sort of half-cell
formed by the imprint of my finger. I will await the transformation
to decide to which sex they belong. As for the perfect insects, they
are inspected, counted and at once released.

In the very unlikely supposition that the distribution of the sexes
might vary in different parts of the colony, I make a second
excavation, at a few yards' distance from the other. It supplies me
with another collection both of perfect insects and of pupae and
larvae.

When the metamorphosis of the laggards is completed, which does not
take many days, I proceed to take a general census. It gives me two
hundred and fifty Halicti. Well, in this number of Bees, collected in
the burrow before any have emerged, I perceive none, absolutely none
but females; or, to be mathematically accurate, I find just one male,
one alone; and he is so small and feeble that he dies without quite
succeeding in divesting himself of his nymphal bands. This solitary
male is certainly accidental. A female population of two hundred and
forty-nine Halicti implies other males than this abortion, or rather
implies none at all. I therefore eliminate him as an accident of no
value and conclude that, in the Cylindrical Halictus, the July
generation consists of females only.

The building-operations start again in the second week of July. The
galleries are restored and lengthened; new cells are fashioned and
the old ones repaired. Follow the provisioning, the laying of the
eggs, the closing of the cells; and, before July is over, there is
solitude again. Let me also say that, during the building-period, not
a male appears in sight, a fact which adds further proof to that
already supplied by my excavations.

With the high temperature of this time of the year, the development
of the larvae makes rapid progress: a month is sufficient for the
various stages of the metamorphosis. On the 24th of August there are
once more signs of life above the burrows of the Cylindrical
Halictus, but under very different conditions. For the first time,
both sexes are present. Males, so easily recognized by their black
livery and their slim abdomen adorned with a red ring, hover
backwards and forwards, almost level with the ground. They fuss about
from burrow to burrow. A few rare females come out for a moment and
then go in again.

I proceed to make an excavation with my spade; I gather
indiscriminately whatever I come across.  Larvae are very scarce;
pupae abound, as do perfect insects. The list of my captures amounts
to eighty males and fifty-eight females. The males, therefore,
hitherto impossible to discover, either on the flowers around or in
the neighbourhood of the burrows, could be picked up to-day by the
hundred, if I wished. They outnumber the females by about four to
three; they are also further developed, in accordance with the
general rule, for most of the backward pupae give me only females.

Once the two sexes had appeared, I expected a third generation that
would spend the winter in the larval state and recommence in May the
annual cycle which I have just described. My anticipation proved to
be at fault. Throughout September, when the sun beats upon the
burrows, I see the males flitting in great numbers from one shaft to
the other. Sometimes a female appears, returning from the fields, but
with no pollen on her legs. She seeks her gallery, finds it, dives
down and disappears.

The males, as though indifferent to her arrival, offer her no
welcome, do not harass her with their amorous pursuits; they continue
to visit the doors of the burrows with a winding and oscillating
flight. For two months, I follow their evolutions. If they set foot
on earth, it is to descend forthwith into some gallery that suits
them.

It is not uncommon to see several of them on the threshold of the
same burrow. Then each awaits his turn to enter; they are as
peaceable in their relations as the females who are joint owners of a
burrow. At other times, one wants to go in as a second is coming out.
This sudden encounter produces no strife. The one leaving the hole
withdraws a little to one side to make enough room for two; the other
slips past as best he can. These peaceful meetings are all the more
striking when we consider the usual rivalry between males of the same
species.

No rubbish-mound stands at the mouth of the shafts, showing that the
building has not been resumed; at the most, a few crumbs of earth are
heaped outside. And by whom, pray? By the males and by them alone.
The lazy sex has bethought itself of working. It turns navvy and
shoots out grains of earth that would interfere with its continual
entrances and exits. For the first time I witness a custom which no
Hymenopteron had yet shown me: I see the males haunting the interior
of the burrows with an assiduity equalling that of the mothers
employed in nest-building.

The cause of these unwonted operations soon stands revealed. The
females seen flitting above the burrows are very rare; the majority
of the feminine population remain sequestered under ground, do not
perhaps come out once during the whole of the latter part of summer.
Those who do venture out go in again soon, empty-handed of course and
always without any amorous teasing from the males, a number of whom
are hovering above the burrows.

On the other hand, watch as carefully as I may, I do not discover a
single act of pairing out of doors. The weddings are clandestine,
therefore, and take place under ground. This explains the males'
fussy visits to the doors of the galleries during the hottest hours
of the day, their continual descents into the depths and their
continual reappearances. They are looking for the females cloistered
in the retirement of the cells.

A little spade-work soon turns suspicion into certainty. I unearth a
sufficient number of couples to prove to me that the sexes come
together underground. When the marriage is consummated, the red-
belted one quits the spot and goes to die outside the burrow, after
dragging from flower to flower the bit of life that remains to him.
The other shuts herself up in her cell, there to await the return of
the month of May.

September is spent by the Halictus solely in nuptial celebrations.
Whenever the sky is fine, I witness the evolutions of the males above
the burrows, with their continual entrances and exits; should the sun
be veiled, they take refuge down the passages. The more impatient,
half-hidden in the pit, show their little black heads outside, as
though peeping for the least break in the clouds that will allow them
to pay a brief visit to the flowers round about. They also spend the
night in the burrows. In the morning, I attend their levee; I see
them put their head to the window, take a look at the weather and
then go in again until the sun beats on the encampment.

The same mode of life is continued throughout October, but the males
become less numerous from day to day as the stormy season approaches
and fewer females remain to be wooed.  By the time that the first
cold weather comes, in November, complete solitude reigns over the
burrows. I once more have recourse to the spade. I find none but
females in their cells. There is not one male left. All have
vanished, all are dead, the victims of their life of pleasure and of
the wind and rain. Thus ends the cycle of the year for the
Cylindrical Halictus.

In February, after a hard winter, when the snow had lain on the
ground for a fortnight, I wanted once more to look into the matter of
my Halicti. I was in bed with pneumonia and at the point of death, to
all appearances. I had little or no pain, thank God, but extreme
difficulty in living. With the little lucidity left to me, being able
to do no other sort of observing, I observed myself dying; I watched
with a certain interest the gradual falling to pieces of my poor
machinery. Were it not for the terror of leaving my family, who were
still young, I would gladly have departed. The after-life must have
so many higher and fairer truths to teach us.

My hour had not yet come. When the little lamps of thought began to
emerge, all flickering, from the dusk of unconsciousness, I wished to
take leave of the Hymenopteron, my fondest joy, and first of all of
my neighbour, the Halictus. My son Emile took the spade and went and
dug the frozen ground. Not a male was found, of course; but there
were plenty of females, numbed with the cold in their cells.

A few were brought for me to see. Their little chambers showed no
efflorescence of rime, with which all the surrounding earth was
coated. The waterproof varnish had been wonderfully efficacious. As
for the anchorites, roused from their torpor by the warmth of the
room, they began to wander about my bed, where I followed them
vaguely with my fading eyes.

May came, as eagerly awaited by the sick man as by the Halicti. I
left Orange for Serignan, my last stage, I expect. While I was
moving, the Bees resumed their building. I gave them a regretful
glance, for I had still much to learn in their company. I have never
since met with such a mighty colony.

These old observations on the habits of the Cylindrical Halictus may
now be followed by a general summary which will incorporate the
recent data supplied by the Zebra Halictus and the Early Halictus.

The females of the Cylindrical Halictus whom I unearth from November
onwards are evidently fecundated, as is proved by the assiduity of
the males during the preceding two months and most positively
confirmed by the couples discovered in the course of my excavations.
These females spend the winter in their cells, as do many of the
early-hatching melliferous insects, such as Anthophorae and Mason-
bees, who build their nests in the spring, the larvae reaching the
perfect state in the summer and yet remaining shut up in their cells
until the following May. But there is this great difference in the
case of the Cylindrical Halictus, that in the autumn the females
leave their cells for a time to receive the males under ground. The
couples pair and the males perish. Left alone, the females return to
their cells, where they spend the inclement season.

The Zebra Halicti, studied first at Orange and then, under better
conditions, at Serignan, in my own enclosure, have not these
subterranean customs: they celebrate their weddings amid the joys of
the light, the sun and the flowers. I see the first males appear in
the middle of September, on the centauries. Generally there are
several of them courting the same bride. Now one, then another, they
swoop upon her suddenly, clasp her, leave her, seize hold of her
again. Fierce brawls decide who shall possess her. One is accepted
and the others decamp. With a swift and angular flight, they go from
flower to flower, without alighting. They hover on the wing, looking
about them, more intent on pairing than on eating.

The Early Halictus did not supply me with any definite information,
partly through my own fault, partly through the difficulty of
excavation in a stony soil, which calls for the pick-axe rather than
the spade. I suspect her of having the nuptial customs of the
Cylindrical Halictus.

There is another difference, which causes certain variations of
detail in these customs. In the autumn, the females of the
Cylindrical Halictus leave their burrows seldom or not at all. Those
who do go out invariably come back after a brief halt upon the
flowers. All pass the winter in the natal cells. On the other hand,
those of the Zebra Halictus move their quarters, meet the males
outside and do not return to the burrows, which my autumn excavations
always find deserted. They hibernate in the first hiding-places that
offer.

In the spring, the females, fecundated since the autumn, come out:
the Cylindrical Halicti from their cells, the Zebra Halicti from
their various shelters, the Early Halicti apparently from their
chambers, like the first. They work at their nests in the absence of
any male, as do also the Social Wasps, whose whole brood has perished
excepting a few mothers also fecundated in the autumn.  In both
cases, the assistance of the males is equally real, only it has
preceded the laying by about six months.

So far, there is nothing new in the life of the Halicti; but here is
where the unexpected appears: in July, another generation is
produced; and this time without males. The absence of masculine
assistance is no longer a mere semblance here, due to an earlier
fecundation: it is a reality established beyond a doubt by the
continuity of my observations and by my excavations during the summer
season, before the emergence of the new Bees. At this period, a
little before July, if my spade unearth the cells of any one of my
three Halicti, the result is always females, nothing but females,
with exceedingly rare exceptions.

True, it may be said that the second progeny is due to the mothers
who knew the males in autumn and who would be able to nidify twice a
year. The suggestion is not admissible. The Zebra Halictus confirms
what I say. She shows us the old mothers no longer leaving the home
but mounting guard at the entrance to the burrows. No harvesting- or
pottery-work is possible with these absorbing doorkeeping-functions.
Therefore there is no new family, even admitting that the mothers'
ovaries are not depleted.

I do not know if a similar argument is valid in the case of the
Cylindrical Halictus. Has she any general survivors? As my attention
had not yet been directed on this point in the old days, when I had
the insect at my door, I have no records to go upon. For all that, I
am inclined to think that the portress of the Zebra Halictus is
unknown here. The reason of this absence would be the number of
workers at the start.

In May, the Zebra Halictus, living by herself in her winter retreat,
founds her house alone. When her daughters succeed her, in July, she
is the only grandmother in the establishment and the post of portress
falls to her. With the Cylindrical Halictus, the conditions are
different. Here the May workers are many in the same burrow, where
they dwell in common during the winter. Supposing that they survive
when the business of the household is finished, to whom will the
office of overseer fall? Their number is so great and they are all so
full of zeal that disorder would be inevitable. But we can leave this
small matter unsettled pending further information.

The fact remains that females, females exclusively, have come out of
the eggs laid in May. They have descendants, of that there is no room
for doubt; they procreate though there are no males in their time.
>From this generation by a single sex, there spring, two months later,
males and females. These mate; and the same order of things
recommences.

To sum up, judging by the three species that form the subject of my
investigations, the Halicti have two generations a year: one in the
spring, issuing from the mothers who have lived through the winter
after being fecundated in the autumn; the other in the summer, the
fruit of parthenogenesis, that is to say, of reproduction by the
powers of the mother alone. Of the union of the two sexes, females
alone are born; parthenogenesis gives birth at the same time to
females and males.

When the mother, the original genitrix, has been able once to
dispense with a coadjutor, why does she need one later? What is the
puny idler there for? He was unnecessary. Why does he become
necessary now? Shall we ever obtain a satisfactory answer to the
question? It is doubtful. However, without much hope of succeeding we
will one day consult the Gall-fly, who is better-versed than we in
the tangled problem of the sexes.

